4
Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

A basic simulation of pure SU(3) gauge theory is something that by now can
be done already on a modern PC and certainly is a pedagogically valuable
exercise. This section provides the techniques necessary for such a calculation.
It also serves as an introduction to Monte Carlo simulations, although for the
sake of having an easy-to-follow presentation, we concentrate on the simplest
algorithms.
The vacuum expectation value of an observable in the quantized Euclidean
gauge ﬁeld theory on a lattice is formally given by the functional integral (cf.
(3.1) and (3.2) in Chap. 3)


1
(4.1)
D[U ] e−SG [U ] O[U ] with Z = D[U ] e−SG [U ] .
O =
Z
However, this expression cannot be evaluated analytically, except for very
small lattices. A Monte Carlo simulation approximates the integral by an
average of the observable evaluated on N sample gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations
Un , distributed with probability ∝ exp (−S[Un ]). The sum1

1
O ≈
O[Un ]
(4.2)
N
Un with
probability
∝ e−S[Un ]

is computed for suﬃciently many conﬁgurations generated by Monte Carlo
algorithms. In this chapter we discuss how such a sequence of conﬁgurations
Un can be obtained as a so-called Markov chain. Usually, subsequently produced gauge conﬁgurations are not completely uncorrelated and we discuss
methods how to deal with this problem and address the statistical analysis
of the data. The observables we will consider prominently in this chapter are
Wilson and Polyakov loops. At the end of this chapter the reader will be able
to compute numerically the static potential with error bars.
1

For the rest of this chapter we omit the subscript G and denote the gauge action
by S[U ].
Gattringer, C., Lang, C.B.: Numerical Simulation of Pure Gauge Theory. Lect. Notes
Phys. 788, 73–101 (2010)
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-01850-3 4

74

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

4.1 The Monte Carlo method
4.1.1 Simple sampling and importance sampling
The Euclidean path integral for a ﬁnite lattice is a high-dimensional integral
over the ﬁeld variables: Scalar ﬁelds or fermions living on the sites and gauge
ﬁelds attached to the links connecting neighboring sites.
Let us for a moment consider a similar but simpler situation. A 4D version
of the Ising spin system of statistical physics has on its sites spin variables
which may assume two values: +1 or −1 (compare (1.92), (1.93), and (1.94)).
This system is a model of ferromagnetism where the variables represent microscopic magnets pointing up or down. One also may consider it as a simpliﬁcation of a scalar quantum ﬁeld theory where the integral over the continuous
variable at each site is replaced by the sum over two values. A lattice with N 4
sites has N 4 such spin variables. Counting all possible combinations of values
4
±1 we have 2N spin conﬁgurations. For a moderately large lattice we may
have N = 16 and therefore 265536 ≈ 1019728 possible spin conﬁgurations. The
exact evaluation of (1.94) corresponds to summing over all these conﬁgurations, clearly an impossible task. We have to ﬁnd a way to provide an estimate
for this sum.
Probability theory tells us that we may approximate an integral over a
function by averaging the function values f (xn ) at values xn randomly chosen
according to the uniform distribution ρu (xn ) = 1/(b − a):
1
b−a

 b

1 
f (xn ) .
N →∞ N
n=1
N

dx f (x) = f ρu = lim
a

(4.3)

The method replaces the exact mean by a sample mean, just like in opinion
polls. Like in those polls, in actual calculations one is conﬁned to a subsample
and a ﬁnite number N . One can prove
the uncertainty in that estimate
 that
√ 
of the correct mean behaves like O 1/ N . Actually, even that is just a
probabilistic statement, since this error has itself a statistical error and so
on. However dubious this may seem at ﬁrst sight, in actual calculations the
method works amazingly well.
Monte Carlo sampling is easily applicable to higher dimensional integrals.
All that changes is that now xn denotes a vector of random variables and one
chooses random points in this multi-dimensional space. In the usual numerical
quadrature methods the eﬀort grows exponentially with the requested accu√
racy. For the Monte Carlo integration the estimated error is always ∝ 1/ N :
In order to improve the accuracy by a factor of 2 one has to take four times
as many random points. Comparisons show that the Monte Carlo method
becomes more eﬃcient than quadrature for more than three dimensions.
However, in our path integral we have to take into account the Boltzmann
factor exp (−S). Depending on the action S it will give diﬀerent importance
to diﬀerent ﬁeld conﬁgurations. When summing over the conﬁgurations it is

4.1 The Monte Carlo method

75

therefore more important to consider the conﬁgurations with larger weight
than those with smaller weight. The central idea of the so-called importance
sampling Monte Carlo method is to approximate the huge sum by a comparatively small subset of conﬁgurations, which are sampled according to the
weight factor.
The expectation value of some function f (x) with regard to a probability
distribution with density ρ(x) is given by
b
dx ρ(x) f (x)
.
(4.4)
f ρ = a  b
dx ρ(x)
a
In the importance sampling Monte Carlo integration this expectation value is
approximated by an average over N values,
1 
f (xn ) ,
N →∞ N
n=1
N

f ρ = lim

(4.5)

for xn ∈ (a, b) each randomly sampled with the normalized probability density
ρ(x)dx
.
dP (x) =  b
dx ρ(x)
a

(4.6)

Our path integral is of the form (4.4) and thus suitable for importance sampling. We may therefore write the expectation of an operator O as
1 
O[Un ] ,
N →∞ N
n=1
N

O = lim

(4.7)

with each of the Un sampled according to the probability distribution density
e−S[U ] D[U ]
dP (U ) = 
,
D[U ] e−S[U ]

(4.8)

the so-called Gibbs measure. The gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations Un are our random
variables. We approximate the integral using a sample of N such conﬁgurations. In actual calculations this number may vary between a few hundreds
up to several millions, depending on the available computer resources and the
complexity √
of the problem. The statistical error of the result will be proportional to 1/ N and the exact value will be obtained for N → ∞. The results
are for ﬁnite size lattices, however. Control of the statistical error belongs to
the central issues of Monte Carlo calculations.
4.1.2 Markov chains
How do we ﬁnd ﬁeld conﬁgurations Un following the probability distribution
(4.8)? The idea is to start from some arbitrary conﬁguration and then to

76

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Fig. 4.1. Schematic sketch of a Markov chain in the space of all conﬁgurations

construct a stochastic sequence of conﬁgurations that eventually follows an
equilibrium distribution P (U ). This is done with a so-called homogeneous
Markov chain or Markov process
U0 −→ U1 −→ U2 −→ . . . .

(4.9)

In this Markov chain conﬁgurations Un are generated subsequently. The index
n labels the conﬁgurations in the order they appear in the chain; it is often
referred to as computer time, not to be mistaken with the Euclidean time of
the 4D space–time. The change of a ﬁeld conﬁguration to a new one is called
an update or a Monte Carlo step.
In Fig. 4.1 we show a schematic sketch of a Markov chain. The boundary
delimits the space of all conﬁgurations. The dots represent conﬁgurations visited by our Markov chain and we connect them with straight lines to indicate
that they are visited subsequently. The Markov chain in the ﬁgure starts in the
upper left corner and then quickly moves toward the center of the blob, where
we ﬁnd a large density of dots. This corresponds to a region of conﬁgurations
with large Boltzmann factor exp (−S) and thus with high probability. The
Markov process is constructed such that it visits conﬁgurations with larger
probabilities more often. A Markov process is characterized by a conditional
transition probability (read: probability to get U  if starting from U )
P (Un = U  |Un−1 = U ) = T (U  |U ) .

(4.10)

This probability depends only on the conﬁgurations U and U  but not on the
index n. The transition probabilities T (U  |U ) obey

T (U  |U ) = 1 .
(4.11)
0 ≤ T (U  |U ) ≤ 1 ,
U

The inequality simply delimits the range of a probability. The sum states
that the total probability to jump from some conﬁguration U to any target
conﬁguration U  is equal to 1 (note that this includes also the case U  = U ).
Let us now discuss an important restriction for T (U  |U ). Once it is in
equilibrium, our Markov process cannot have sinks or sources of probability.

4.1 The Monte Carlo method

77

Thus the probability to hop into a conﬁguration U  at the step Un−1 → Un
has to be equal to the probability for hopping out of U  at this step. The
corresponding balance equation reads as


!
T (U  |U ) P (U ) =
T (U |U  ) P (U  ) .
(4.12)
U

U

On the left-hand side we sum the transition probability T (U  |U ) leading into
the ﬁnal conﬁguration U  over all starting conﬁgurations U , weighted by the
probability P (U ) that the system actually is in the conﬁguration U . This
expression gives the total probability to end up in U  and has to equal the
probability to hop out of U  , which we compute on the right-hand side. It is
given by the probability P (U  ) of ﬁnding the system in the conﬁguration U 
times the sum of the transition probability T (U |U  ) over all ﬁnal conﬁgurations U the system could jump into. Note that on both sides we also included
the case where U  = U , i.e., the case without actual transition.
Before we discuss a solution of the balance equation (4.12), let us note
an important property. The sum on the right-hand side can be calculated
explicitly by using the normalization property (4.11). We ﬁnd

T (U  |U ) P (U ) = P (U  ) ,
(4.13)
U

showing that the equilibrium distribution P (U ) is a ﬁxed point of the Markov
process. Once the equilibrium distribution is obtained, the system stays there
upon applying T . Starting the process from an arbitrary start conﬁguration
U0 with initial distribution P (0) (U ) = δ(U − U0 ), one eventually obtains the
equilibrium distribution P (U ) by applying the transition matrix iteratively:
T

T

T

T

P (0) → P (1) → P (2) → . . . → P

(= equilibrium distribution) .
(4.14)
For an elementary proof of this property see, e.g., [1].
Let us address an important point. For obtaining correct results, the
Markov chain must be able to access all conﬁgurations. In other words, it
must be possible to reach all points inside the blob of Fig. 4.1 in a ﬁnite number of steps. If the transition matrix T (U  |U ) is strictly positive for all pairs
U, U  , then the process is aperiodic and every conﬁguration can be eventually reached. This property is called strong ergodicity. In realistic simulations
ergodicity and the related problem of relaxation are important questions. In
particular, if there are topologically diﬀerent sectors in conﬁguration space,
some Monte Carlo updating algorithms may have problems connecting them.
In an actual calculation one starts to calculate observables according to
(4.7) only after a suﬃcient number of equilibrating Monte Carlo steps. The
subtle question is when one can assume that the distribution of the considered conﬁgurations is already close enough to the equilibrium distribution.
This decision is usually based on the measurement of certain observables and
correlations. We will discuss this issue in more detail later in this chapter.

78

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

We now present a suﬃcient condition for a solution of the balance equation
(4.12). On both sides we have sums over all conﬁgurations U , and these sums
have to be equal. A solution can be obtained, by requiring that the equality
holds term-wise,
(4.15)
T (U  |U ) P (U ) = T (U |U  ) P (U  ) .
This suﬃcient condition is known as the detailed balance condition. Although
other solutions are known, most algorithms use the detailed balance condition.
In the next section we will discuss the “mother of all Monte Carlo algorithms”
based on (4.15), the Metropolis algorithm.
4.1.3 Metropolis algorithm – general idea
The Metropolis algorithm [2], which advances the Markov chain from a conﬁguration Un−1 to some new conﬁguration Un , consists of the following steps
(we use P (U ) ∝ exp(−S[U ])):
Step 1: Choose some candidate conﬁguration U  according to some a priori
selection probability T0 (U  |U ), where U = Un−1 .
Step 2: Accept the candidate conﬁguration U  as the new conﬁguration Un
with the acceptance probability


T0 (U |U  ) exp (−S[U  ])

TA (U |U ) = min 1,
.
(4.16)
T0 (U  |U ) exp (−S[U ])
If a suggested change is not accepted, the unchanged conﬁguration is
considered again in the Markov chain and included in the measurements
like the others.
Step 3: Repeat these steps from the beginning.
It is straightforward to see that the total transition probability T = T0 TA
fulﬁlls the detailed balance condition
T (U  |U ) exp (−S[U ])



T0 (U |U  ) exp (−S[U  ])
= T0 (U  |U ) min 1,
exp (−S[U ])
T0 (U  |U ) exp (−S[U ])
(4.17)
= min (T0 (U  |U ) exp (−S[U ]) , T0 (U |U  ) exp (−S[U  ]))
= T (U |U  ) exp (−S[U  ])

due to the positivity of all factors and the symmetry of the min operation. In
many cases one uses a symmetric selection probability which obeys
T0 (U |U  ) = T0 (U  |U ) .

(4.18)

In this case (4.16) simpliﬁes to
TA (U  |U ) = min (1, exp (−ΔS)) with ΔS = S[U  ] − S[U ] .

(4.19)

4.1 The Monte Carlo method

79

In particular for symmetric T0 , the information necessary to decide on acceptance or rejection comes only from the change of the action ΔS with regard
to the change of the conﬁguration. If this change is local, e.g., just involves a
single link variable Uμ (n), then ΔS may be determined from the ﬁeld values
in the local neighborhood.

4.1.4 Metropolis algorithm for Wilson’s gauge action
Let us make the idea of the Metropolis algorithm more transparent by
discussing its application in the SU(N ) Wilson gauge action (2.49) in four
dimensions. Starting from some conﬁguration U , our candidate conﬁguration U  for the Metropolis update diﬀers from the conﬁguration U by
the value of only a single link variable Uμ (n) . In four dimensions this
link is shared by six plaquettes, and only these six plaquettes are aﬀected
when changing Uμ (n) → Uμ (n) . Their local contribution to the action is
(compare (3.93))
β 
β
Re tr [6 1 − Uμ (n) A] ,
Re tr [1 − Uμ (n) Pi ] =
N i=1
N
6

S[Uμ (n) ]loc =
with A =

6

i=1

Pi =



(Uν (n+ μ̂) U−μ (n+ μ̂+ ν̂) U−ν (n+ ν̂)

(4.20)

ν=μ

+ U−ν (n+ μ̂) U−μ (n+ μ̂− ν̂) Uν (n− ν̂)) .
Here the Pi are products of the other three gauge link variables that build up
the plaquettes together with Uμ (n) . These products are called staples and we
have written explicitly the sum A over all staples.
For the change of the action we obtain
ΔS = S[Uμ (n) ]loc − S[Uμ (n)]loc = −

β
Re tr [(Uμ (n) − Uμ (n)) A] , (4.21)
N

where A is not aﬀected by the change of Uμ (n).
An important part of the algorithm is the choice of the candidate link
Uμ (n) . It should be an element of SU(N ) not too far away from the old link
Uμ (n), such that the average acceptance probability (4.16) for the candidate
does not become too small. A standard technique is to use
Uμ (n) = X Uμ (n) ,

(4.22)

where X is a random element of the gauge group SU(N ) in the vicinity of 1.
To achieve a symmetric selection probability T0 , X and X −1 have to be chosen
with equal probability. How such matrices X are constructed in practice will
be discussed in Sect. 4.2.

80

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Based on equations (4.20), (4.21), and (4.22), a realization of the Metropolis algorithm with single link variable updates and symmetric selection probability T0 may be brieﬂy summarized:
Step 1: Given some gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration, choose a site n and direction
μ and a candidate value Uμ (n) according to some symmetric selection
probability T0 , using, e.g., (4.22).
Step 2: Compute the sum over the staples and from this the change of the
action ΔS according to (4.21). Compute a random number r uniformly
distributed in the interval [0, 1). Accept the new variable Uμ (n) if r ≤
exp(−ΔS) and reject it otherwise.
Step 3: Repeat these steps from the beginning.
We point out that the change in Step 2 is always accepted if the action decreases or remains invariant, i.e., exp(−ΔS) ≥ 1. This alone would lead to
a minimum of the action in conﬁguration space, corresponding to a solution
of the classical ﬁeld equations. However, due to the random variable r also
conﬁgurations with increased action will be accepted every now and then.
One could say that this feature reproduces the quantum ﬂuctuations of the
system.
The order in which one visits the links (n, μ) to update the corresponding
link variables Uμ (n) can be chosen at one’s discretion. However, some implementations prefer a certain order and visit all lattice points systematically,
e.g., to utilize vector computation capabilities of the computer.
Furthermore, it is computationally economic to repeat the updating step a
few times for the visited variable, since the computation of the sum of staples
A is costly. Thus, once A is calculated, one oﬀers the system candidate links
Uμ (n) repeatedly and accepts them according to Step 2. This modiﬁcation is
called multi-hit Metropolis algorithm. The number of candidate links can be
tuned for eﬃciency. Theoretically, the inﬁnite repetition leads to a method
equivalent to the heat bath algorithm which we discuss in Sect. 4.3.

4.2 Implementation of Monte Carlo algorithms for SU(3)
In the last section we have presented the idea of the single link Metropolis
update as a ﬁrst approach to Monte Carlo algorithms. However, so far all
the details of an actual implementation have been left out. These details, in
particular the representation of the variables, boundary conditions, generation
of a candidate link, and the generation of random numbers, will be provided
in this section. Once we have presented these tools, we will be able to discuss
two more Monte Carlo algorithms, namely the heat bath and overrelaxation
methods.
Part of the material in this section is discussed for gauge groups U(1) and
SU(2). The abelian group U(1) is a simple do-it-yourself example and the
update of SU(2) subgroups is a building block for updating SU(3).

4.2 Implementation of Monte Carlo algorithms for SU(3)

81

4.2.1 Representation of the link variables
We have already seen in the discussion of the Metropolis algorithm that matrix
multiplication is the central operation of the update (compare (4.20), (4.21),
and (4.22)). For this reason it is important to ﬁnd a suitable and eﬃcient
representation for the link variables.
The deﬁning representations of the gauge ﬁeld variables are complex numbers for gauge group U(1), complex 2×2 matrices for SU(2), and complex 3×3
matrices for SU(3). However, due to the unitarity of the group elements there
are further restrictions to be obeyed. The minimal number of parameters for
the three groups is equal to the number of generators, 1, 3, and 8. Although
one can think of representations of group elements that have just these minimal sets of parameters, in practical calculations it is often more convenient to
use a redundant representation. This leads to faster evaluation of the multiplication of group elements. This operation is the most time-consuming part
of the calculation, because it has to be done so frequently. For U(1) one uses
a complex number z with unit modulus |z| = 1. This implies that two real
numbers instead of a single phase have to be stored.
For SU(2) it is convenient to store the ﬁrst row (a, b) of the matrix


a b
(4.23)
with |a|2 + |b|2 = 1 .
U=
−b∗ a∗
This corresponds to storing two complex numbers (four real numbers instead
of the minimum of three). With a = x0 +i x4 and b = x3 +i x2 this is equivalent
to using the vector x = (x0 , x) of four real coeﬃcients in the representation
U = x0 1 + i x · σ

with

det[U ] = |x|2 = x20 + |x|2 =

3


x2i = 1 ,

(4.24)

i=0

where σ denotes the vector of the three Pauli matrices (see (A.8)).
The group elements for SU(3) may be represented either by the complete
complex matrix (9 complex numbers = 18 real numbers instead of the minimum of 8) or by the ﬁrst two rows, corresponding to the complex 3 vectors
u and v (6 complex numbers = 12 real numbers). One has to restrict these
vectors to unit length, and they have to be orthogonal to each other:
|u|2 = u∗ · u = |u1 |2 + |u2 |2 + |u3 |2 = 1 ,
|v|2 = v ∗ · v = |v1 |2 + |v2 |2 + |v3 |2

=1,

(4.25)

(u, v) = u∗ · v = u∗1 v1 + u∗2 v2 + u∗3 v3 = 0 .
Due to the properties of SU(3) matrices, the third row of the matrix can be
reconstructed from the ﬁrst two rows:
⎞
⎛
u
(4.26)
U =⎝ v ⎠ .
u∗ × v ∗

82

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Thus in principle it is suﬃcient to store only two rows. However, due to the
abundance of disc space and memory, nowadays mainly redundant representations of the group elements are used. Within the computer program the
gauge ﬁeld is then an array with indices for the space and time positions of
the lattice sites and an index indicating the direction of the link variable.
For non-abelian theories there are also color indices depending on the type of
representation used (e.g., two if the matrix form is used).
Whatever representation one chooses, because of the accumulation of
rounding errors in the multiplications of the group elements, the matrices have
to be projected to unitarity regularly. The period depends on the number of
digits chosen and has to be decided based on observation. Re-unitarization
is done for U(1) by dividing by the norm. For SU(2) one normalizes the
ﬁrst row and then (if necessary in the chosen representation) reconstructs
the second from the ﬁrst. Equivalently, for SU(3) one follows essentially the
well-known Gram–Schmidt method for building orthonormal basis elements
in vector spaces. The ﬁrst row is normalized, the second constructed from the
current values orthogonalized to the ﬁrst row,
unew = u/|u| ,
v new = v  /|v  | where

v  = v − unew (v · u∗new ) ,

(4.27)

and the third row is constructed from the ﬁrst two rows as given in (4.26).
4.2.2 Boundary conditions
Since a numerical simulation works on a ﬁnite lattice, boundary conditions
have to be implemented. For gauge ﬁelds one usually uses periodic boundary
conditions (compare (A.27) for our deﬁnition of the lattice)
Uμ (N, n2 , n3 , n4 ) = Uμ (0, n2 , n3 , n4 ) , Uμ (n1 , N, n3 , n4 ) = Uμ (n1 , 0, n3 , n4 ) ,
Uμ (n1 , n2 , N, n4 ) = Uμ (n1 , n2 , 0, n4 ) , Uμ (n1 , n2 , n3 , NT ) = Uμ (n1 , n2 , n3 , 0) .
(4.28)
For fermions one often chooses boundary conditions anti-periodic in one direction as will be discussed in Chap. 5. The boundary conditions deﬁne the
topology of the underlying manifold. Periodic and anti-periodic boundary conditions correspond to a torus in four dimensions – each direction behaves like
a circle. Choosing toroidal boundary conditions (as opposed to, e.g., Dirichlet
boundary conditions) has the advantage of preserving the discrete translational symmetry of the lattice. Other boundary conditions and other lattice
discretizations are possible and have been studied, but the majority of calculations are done with hypercubic lattices and (anti-) periodic boundary
conditions.
When calculating the change of the action ΔS for a Monte Carlo step, one
needs the addresses of nearest neighbors in the four space–time directions.
This may seem trivial, but in actual calculations it takes some computer time.
For this reason various acceleration techniques have been developed. Most of

4.2 Implementation of Monte Carlo algorithms for SU(3)

83

them use pre-calculated index arrays to implement neighbor calculations and
boundary conditions at the same time.
4.2.3 Generating a candidate link for the Metropolis update
We still need to address how we generate the candidate link for the Metropolis
algorithm presented in the last section.
In the Metropolis algorithm one has to suggest a candidate link variable
Uμ (n) in the vicinity of the old value Uμ (n). As already stated in (4.22) this
can be done as
(4.29)
Uμ (n) = XUμ (n) ,
where X is a randomly chosen element of the gauge group close to the unit element. The acceptance rate can be adjusted to reasonable values by tuning the
spread of the matrices X around unity. A high acceptance rate may seem desirable but usually means too small changes and slow motion in conﬁguration
space. Smaller acceptance is costly because many candidate conﬁgurations
are generated but not accepted. As a rule of thumb an acceptance rate of
0.5 is reasonable, such that in average, one out of two suggested candidate
conﬁgurations is accepted in the Monte Carlo step.
Choosing candidates for the Metropolis step is simple for U(1) where one
may choose X = ei ϕ with ϕ ∈ (−ε, ε) randomly chosen with uniform distribution. Then ε may be tuned for good acceptance. However, this requires computation of the sine function and one wants to avoid costly computations
 in the
heart of the program. Thus it is more eﬃcient to take X = (1 + i ϕ)/ 1 + ϕ2
instead, as long as ε is not too large (less than 1). Further possibilities can be
explored. One sees that this topic moves from science to art [3].
For the gauge groups SU(2) and SU(3) the determination of random group
elements is more costly. One may use various methods to suggest elements
around unity. For SU(2) one may choose four random numbers ri uniformly
distributed in (− 1/2, 1/2). The SU(2) matrix X then is constructed following
(4.24) with x0 and x given by

x = ε r/|r| , x0 = sign(r0 ) 1 − ε2 ,
(4.30)
where ε is again the parameter that controls the spread of X around 1.
For SU(3), updating matrices X can be constructed from such SU(2) matrices embedded in 3 × 3 matrices according to
⎞
⎛
⎞
⎛
⎞
⎛
s11 0 s12
1 0 0
r11 r12 0
(4.31)
R = ⎝r21 r22 0⎠ , S = ⎝ 0 1 0 ⎠ , T = ⎝0 t11 t12 ⎠ .
0 t21 t22
0 0 1
s21 0 s22
A possible choice for X is then given by the product
X = RST .

(4.32)

84

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Since the matrices R, S, T are close to 1, so is the product X.
In order to preserve the symmetry of the a priori selection probability
T0 (U  |U ), X and X −1 = X † should be chosen with equal probability. A
simple way of doing this is to construct a set of random SU(3) matrices close
to unity (e.g., by using (4.32)) and to include in this set also the hermitian
conjugate of each matrix. The matrices X used to build the candidate link
according to (4.29) are chosen randomly out of this set. The set is rebuilt with
new group elements from time to time.
4.2.4 A few remarks on random numbers
The central step of the Monte Carlo procedure needs random numbers. In the
computer programs these are so-called pseudo random numbers, generated
reproducibly by algorithms. The statistical properties of the pseudo random
numbers are very close to those of real random numbers. Typical Monte Carlo
runs may need O(1012 ) random numbers. Therefore, utmost care has to be
taken in selecting a proper generator. Standard implementations of random
number generators are often not reliable enough and produce subtly correlated numbers with too small periods. High-quality generators use the socalled lagged Fibonacci method and there are generators with extremely long
guaranteed periods O(10171 ) [4].
Pseudo random numbers are usually generated according to a uniform distribution in the interval [0, 1). There exists a variety of algorithms to generate
from these other distributions [3, 5]. This may be costly in terms of computer
time, and ﬁnding eﬃcient and “well-behaved” generators (in the statistical
sense) is an important task of the Monte Carlo approach. Indeed, the whole
gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration may be considered a vector of random numbers following a distribution: the Boltzmann distribution.
Any generator has to be initialized. In case one continues a long run one
should also store the ﬁnal state of the generator in order to be able to restart
it at that position.

4.3 More Monte Carlo algorithms
Meanwhile there exists a collection of updating algorithms. If, such as in simple Metropolis, the changes of a Monte Carlo step aﬀect only a few variables
locally, one calls this a local algorithm. Unfortunately, local algorithms allow for only very small steps in the Markov chain and therefore are not very
eﬃcient. One has to perform many updating steps in order to obtain uncorrelated conﬁgurations. The situation is better for nonlocal algorithms, where
large subsets of ﬁeld variables are changed at once. Whereas for spin models
and scalar ﬁeld theories there are excellent nonlocal (e.g., cluster) algorithms,
this is not the case for gauge ﬁelds, where, up to now, no eﬃcient nonlocal

4.3 More Monte Carlo algorithms

85

updating method is known. The following algorithms have been applied to
gauge ﬁelds:
Heat bath: Equivalent to an iterated Metropolis updating, optimizing the
local acceptance rate [6].
Overrelaxation: A sometimes very eﬃcient method to improve the step size
in the Markov chain, exploiting symmetry properties of the action [7, 8].
To obtain ergodicity it has to be combined with other algorithms.
Microcanonical: Reformulates the updating in terms of a deterministic, discrete Hamiltonian evolution using a doubled number of variables: (U, Π).
A variant method introduces a microcanonical demon [9].
Hybrid Monte Carlo: Combines a number of microcanonical updates (a
trajectory) with a ﬁnal Monte Carlo acceptance step [10].
Langevin: Uses the stochastic diﬀerential equation for the construction of
conﬁgurations [11–13]; equivalence to the microcanonical and the hybrid
method may be demonstrated (in certain limits).
Diﬀerent updating algorithms may have diﬀerent performance in terms of the
required computational eﬀort and the resulting step size in the Markov chain.
Here we present in more detail the heat bath algorithm and overrelaxation.
In Sect. 4.4 we will outline the steps necessary for a simulation of pure gauge
theory based on these algorithms.
4.3.1 The heat bath algorithm
In the heat bath method one combines steps 1 and 2 of the single link Metropolis update into a single step and chooses the new value Uμ (n) according to
the local probability distribution deﬁned by the surrounding staples,


β
Re tr [U A] .
(4.33)
dP (U ) = dU exp
N
The sum of staples A is calculated according to (4.20) and all links, except
for U = Uμ (n) , are held ﬁxed and therefore A is constant. Note that dU
denotes the Haar integration measure of the gauge group. This may be computationally quite demanding. It has the advantage, however, that the link
variable always changes. The implementation depends on the details of the
gauge group and of the action.
We ﬁrst present in some detail the heat bath method for the gauge group
SU(2) with Wilson action and generalize the method to SU(3) in the next
paragraph. For the case of SU(2) there exists an eﬃcient method to ﬁnd a
new link element. This group is special, since a sum of two SU(2) elements
is proportional to another SU(2) matrix. We use this property and write the
sum of staples A from (4.21) in the form

(4.34)
A = a V with a = det[A] ,

86

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

where it can be shown that det[A] ≥ 0. If det[A] vanishes one chooses a random
SU(2) matrix for U . Otherwise we ﬁnd that V = A/a is a properly normalized
SU(2) matrix. Inserting (4.34) in our probability distribution (4.33), we obtain
(for SU(2) we have set N = 2 in this equation)


1
a β Re tr [U V ] .
(4.35)
dP (U ) = dU exp
2
The Haar measure dU is invariant under transformations of the origin in group
space (cf. Chap. 3) and we may also write it as d(U V ). If we deﬁne a matrix
X by the product X = U V , the local probability distribution for X is


1
dP (X) = dX exp
a β Re tr [X] .
(4.36)
2
If we generate a matrix X distributed accordingly, the candidate link is obtained by
1
(4.37)
Uμ (n) = U = X V † = X A† .
a
We therefore have reduced the problem to generating matrices X distributed according to (4.36). The Haar measure in that equation may be
written in terms of the real parameters used in the representation (4.24) of
the group elements. For X in representation (4.24) with x ∈ R4 , |x| = 1, the
Haar measure reads


1 4
d x δ x20 + |x|2 − 1
(4.38)
2
π





'
'
1
θ(1 − x20 )
2 + δ |x| +
= 2 d4 x 
1
−
x
1 − x20
δ
|x|
−
,
0
π
2 1 − x20

dX =

where in the second line we have used a well-known formula for the Dirac
delta of functions. We rewrite the volume element as
d4 x = d|x| |x|2 d2 Ω dx0 ,

(4.39)

where d2 Ω denotes the spherical angle element in the integration over the
3-vector x. We can use the Dirac deltas to remove the |x| integration. Only
the
 ﬁrst Dirac delta in (4.38) contributes and from now on |x| is frozen to
1 − x20 . The Haar measure assumes the form
dX =

(1 − x20 ) θ(1 − x20 )
1 2
1 2

d
Ω
dx
=
d Ω dx0
0
2
2
π
2π 2
2 1 − x0

'

1 − x20 θ(1 − x20 ) .
(4.40)

Note that in the matrix representation chosen for X we have |x0 | ≤ 1 and
therefore we could have omitted the step function θ. Due to tr[X] = 2 x0 , we
end up with the distribution for X in the form (using d2 Ω = d cos ϑ dϕ)

4.3 More Monte Carlo algorithms

dP (X) =

1
d cos ϑ dϕ dx0
2π 2

'

1 − x20 ea β x0 ,

87

(4.41)

with x0 ∈ [−1, 1], cos ϑ ∈ [−1, 1], and ϕ ∈ [0, 2π). In order to ﬁnd a random
matrix X we have to determine random variables x0 , ϑ, and ϕ according to
this distribution. Since the distribution for the three variables factorizes, we
can generate them independently:
Random
variable x0 : The task is to ﬁnd values x0 distributed according to

1 − x20 ea β x0 . Following [14, 15] we introduce a variable λ
x0 = 1 − 2 λ2 with x0 ∈ [−1, 1] ⇒
'

2
dx0 1 − x20 ea β x0 ∝ dλ λ2 1 − λ2 e−2 a β λ

(4.42)
with

λ ∈ [0, 1] .

After this transformation we need to generate λ with the polynomially
modiﬁed Gaussian distribution density
p1 (λ) = λ2 e−2 a β λ

2

(4.43)

and accept it with an accept/reject step using the square root function

p2 (λ) = 1 − λ2 .
(4.44)
Algorithms to compute random numbers with Gaussian distributions are
well known [3, 5]. We proceed as follows [15]:
Step 1: One starts with a triplet of random numbers ri , i = 1, 2, 3
uniformly distributed in (0, 1] (the value 0 has to be avoided; since usual
random number generators cover the interval [0, 1) one just takes (1 − ri )
instead). Then
λ2 = −


1 
ln(r1 ) + cos2 (2 π r2 ) ln(r3 )
2aβ

(4.45)

follows the required distribution.
Step 2: We correct for the factor p2 (λ) and thus accept only those
values of λ which obey

(4.46)
r ≤ 1 − λ2 or, better r2 ≤ 1 − λ2 ,
where r is a random variable uniformly distributed in [0, 1). The accepted
values give x0 = 1 − 2 λ2 following the requested distribution.
Random variable |x|: Actually this random variable was removed when we
integrated it out using the 
Dirac delta of (4.38). However, in this step the
length was frozen to |x| = 1 − x20 and we now can compute it from the
x0 determined in the last step.
Random variables cos ϑ and ϕ: The angular variables correspond to the
direction of x and are uniformly distributed. A possible method is to
choose three random numbers r1 , r2 , and r3 uniformly distributed in
2
2
2
[−1, 1) and to accept them
 when r1 +r2 +r3 ≤ 1. This 3-vector is then nor2
malized to length |x| = 1 − x0 .

88

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

After these steps we end up with a vector (x0 , x) and from that we can
compute the matrix X using representation (4.24). We summarize the steps
for updating an SU(2) link variable with the heat bath algorithm:

1. Find the sum of staples A, compute a = det[A], and set V = A/a.
2. Find a group element X according to distribution (4.41) as discussed
above.
3. The new link variable is U = X V † .
There is no heat bath algorithm which directly produces SU(3) link variables. However, one can apply a pseudo heat bath method by iterating the
heat bath for the SU(2) subgroups of SU(3) [16]. Two such SU(2) subgroups
would be suﬃcient to cover the whole group space. However, for symmetry
reasons one chooses three such groups as given in (4.31). Each of the three
matrices is determined with the heat bath for SU(2) as discussed.
For this aim let us consider again (4.33). Let us assume that we want to
modify the link variable U by left multiplication with, e.g., the ﬁrst matrix
R of (4.31). The exponent in the local Boltzmann weight (4.33) then would
read (now N = 3 since this is for SU(3))
β
Re tr [R U A] .
3

(4.47)

Denoting W = U A the trace contains the terms
tr [R W ] = r11 w11 + r12 w21 + r21 w12 + r22 w22 + terms without rij . (4.48)
A heat bath algorithm for R is therefore inﬂuenced only by those terms in W
that multiply the four nontrivial terms in R, the sub-block of W corresponding
to the relevant sub-matrix of R. We ﬁnd that W plays the role of A in (4.33)
in the discussion of the SU(2) heat bath algorithm. It is no group element
of SU(2) but proportional to 1. Thus one can proceed like before ﬁnding the
elements of R in the “heat bath” of W .
We multiply the resulting R with W to obtain a new W = R U A, which
now provides the SU(2) heat bath factors for S. The resulting S again multiplies W and leads to T . The three SU(2) heat bath factor matrices give the
new value of the link variable:
U

⇒

U = T S R U .

(4.49)

This pseudo heat bath update for the SU(2) subgroups may also be combined
with overrelaxation steps as discussed in the next section.
4.3.2 Overrelaxation
This method tries to change the variables as much as possible in order to
speed up the motion through conﬁguration space. One utilizes the property

4.4 Running the simulation

89

that in the Metropolis algorithm new conﬁgurations are always accepted if
they do not change the action. Like for the heat bath algorithm the starting
point is the probability distribution (4.33) of a single link variable Uμ (n) = U
in the background of its neighbors which we hold ﬁxed with the sum of staples
A calculated according to (4.21). The idea of the overrelaxation method is to
ﬁnd a new value U  which has the same probability weight as U and thus is
automatically accepted.
Let us ﬁrst illustrate the idea for the gauge group U(1). In that case we
can write U = exp(i ϕ) and for the sum of staples obtain A = a exp(iα). The
exponent for the local probability (4.33), the local action, can be written as
(for U(1) the trace is gone and N = 1; compare (3.94))


(4.50)
β Re(U A) = β a Re eiϕ eiα = β a cos(ϕ + α).
Obviously the reﬂection of (ϕ + α) → −(ϕ + α) or, equivalently, the change
ϕ → (2π−2α−ϕ) leaves the local action invariant and thus is always accepted.
For the non-abelian groups one suggests a change according to the ansatz
U → U = V † U† V † ,

(4.51)

with a gauge group element V chosen such that the action is invariant.
The choice of V is nontrivial in the general case. However, as discussed
in connection with (4.34), for the gauge group SU(2) the sum of staples A
is proportional
 to a group matrix and one constructs V = A/a with the real
number a = det[A]. The matrix V is now unitary, i.e., V −1 = V † . We ﬁnd
tr[U  A] = tr[V † U † V † A] = a tr[V † U † ] = tr[A† U † ] = tr[U A] .

(4.52)

In the last step we have used the reality of the trace for SU(2) matrices. This
choice for U  indeed leaves the action invariant. Also the selection probability
T0 is symmetric, since U  = V † U † V † implies U = V † U † V † . In the rare case
that det A vanishes, any random link variable is accepted.
Implementing overrelaxation for other gauge groups like SU(3) may be
more involved and eventually not eﬃcient. Usually only updating programs
for the gauge groups U(1) and SU(2) make use of this method. For SU(3)
overrelaxation has been studied in [17].
The overrelaxation algorithm alone is not ergodic. It samples the conﬁguration space on the subspace of constant action. This is called the microcanonical ensemble. Since one wants to determine conﬁgurations according to
the canonical ensemble, i.e., distributed according to the Boltzmann weight,
one has to combine the overrelaxation steps with other updating algorithms,
such as Metropolis or heat bath steps.

4.4 Running the simulation
After having introduced the techniques and algorithms for the update we can
now discuss how to organize an actual simulation. A Monte Carlo simulation
of a lattice gauge theory consists of several basic steps:

90

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Initialization: The ﬁeld conﬁguration has to be initialized.
Equilibration updates: Suﬃciently many updates have to be done, until
the subsequently generated conﬁgurations represent the (approximate)
equilibrium distribution.
Evaluation of the observables and intermediate updates: As soon as
the system is in equilibrium, one can start to compute the observables on
the Monte Carlo conﬁgurations. The conﬁgurations used for computing
the observables should be separated by several intermediate updates.
These steps are discussed in some detail below. After the data are produced
they have to be analyzed with regard to statistical properties (see Sect. 4.5).
Only then one can study the physics content of the resulting data.
Table 4.1 shows a schematic listing demonstrating how the individual parts
of the Monte Carlo program are combined in the computer code.
Table 4.1. Structure of a Monte Carlo program for pure gauge theory
Start of program
Declaration of parameters and variables:
Initialize random number generator.
Initialize tables (e.g., neighbor indices, factors, couplings).
Initialize gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration.
Loop over “equilibrating” iterations:
for n = 1 until nequi :
Update the conﬁguration.
end for
Loop over iterations with update and measurements:
for n = 1 until nmeasure :
for i = 1 until ndiscarded :
Update the conﬁguration.
end for
Measure the observables for the last of these conﬁgurations.
Write the values to some data ﬁle. (Maybe also save the
current conﬁguration and the status of the random number
generator to some ﬁle.)
end for
Write the ﬁnal conﬁguration and the status of the random
number generator to some ﬁle for future restart.
Write the ﬁnal output to the data ﬁle.
Close all open ﬁles.
End of program

4.4 Running the simulation

91

4.4.1 Initialization
Any ﬁeld conﬁguration can be chosen as initial conﬁguration. After suﬃciently
many updates, eventually conﬁgurations distributed according to the equilibrium distribution will be produced due to the Markov chain property (4.14).
Two typical start conﬁgurations are the so-called cold start and hot start conﬁgurations.
Cold start: All link variables are set to the unit element (Uμ (n) = 1).
This corresponds to trivial plaquette variables and minimal gauge action, a
situation approximately expected for small gauge coupling g (large β). In
statistical models the weak coupling regime corresponds to low temperature,
hence the name.
Hot start: The gauge ﬁeld matrices are chosen randomly in group space.
Usually one pays little care for a uniform distribution but just takes suitable
normalized random vectors for that purpose. From these the matrix rows are
built as discussed above in the unitarization procedure (4.26) and (4.27).
Some like it hot, some like it cold, some use mixed start conﬁgurations, like
one half of the variables cold and the other half hot. Virtually any value of the
total action can be mimicked this way, albeit without any internal structure.
In any case one has to equilibrate the system before calculating observables.
Very long sequences of updates have to be split into several subsequent
runs of the Monte Carlo program. In this case one starts with the last stored
conﬁguration and the corresponding state of the random number generator.
4.4.2 Equilibration updates
The central part of the program is the updating subroutine. Given a conﬁguration one systematically updates all gauge links, suggesting new values
and accepting them according to one of the methods discussed. Visiting all
links once is often referred to as a sweep through the lattice. To optimize the
performance, i.e., to have large steps in the Markov chain, often sweeps with
diﬀerent algorithms are combined. Such a combined sweep could consist of a
heat bath sweep followed by two or three overrelaxation sweeps.
An important question is whether one has performed suﬃciently many
equilibration sweeps. Only after such an equilibration phase, the algorithm
produces conﬁgurations with the correct distribution (compare (4.14)). A simple, ﬁrst test for suﬃcient equilibration is given by comparing how a set of
observables changes with the number of sweeps. In particular one can compare
one such series of data obtained from a cold start to a series of data obtained
from a hot start. As soon as the curves for the observables from the hot and
the cold run approach each other, the system is nearing equilibrium.
In general the speed at which the system approaches the equilibrium will
depend on the updating algorithm as well as on the gauge coupling β, the
size of the lattice, and the type of action used. Large systems and large β

92

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

will require more equilibration steps than small lattices and small values of β.
Also diﬀerent observables will approach their equilibrium values at diﬀerent
rates.
In Sect. 4.5 we will put the determination of a suﬃcient number of equilibration steps on a sounder basis. There we will discuss the autocorrelation
time which is a measure for how much two subsequent conﬁgurations in a
Markov chain are correlated.

4.4.3 Evaluation of the observables
Once the system is in equilibrium, the conﬁgurations can be used for the
evaluation of the observables. Depending on the updating algorithm, subsequently generated conﬁgurations will be more or less correlated. Thus
several sweeps should be performed between evaluating the observables.
We remark that often the evaluation of the observables is referred to as
measurement.
A careful analysis of the statistical parameters, in particular the aforementioned autocorrelation time as discussed in Sect. 4.5, gives an indication
of how many intermediate conﬁgurations should be discarded between two
measurements. In practice this decision depends also on the cost for measuring the observables. If the measurement of observables is expensive (like it is
for computing quark propagators on a gauge ﬁeld background), one tries to
have less correlation between subsequently measured conﬁgurations. In any
case the ﬁnal analysis should take into account that conﬁgurations may not
be statistically independent.
Two key observables for simulations of pure gauge theory are Wilson and
Polyakov loops (compare (3.50) and (3.60)). When performing the measurements one typically makes use of translation invariance (for periodic boundary
conditions) and averages over all possible realizations of the observables in order to improve the statistics. This means that for the Wilson loop one averages
over all positions where the loop can start from. In addition one can place the
loop in diﬀerent planes (corresponding to the symmetry operations of a hypercubic lattice) which gives for a quadratic loop an average over 6 |Λ| terms
(where |Λ| denotes the number of sites) and an average over 12 |Λ| contributions for rectangular loops. For the Polyakov loop one averages over all spatial
positions n or, if products are considered, over all combinations n, m for each
distance |n − m|. This involves sums over very many terms and accumulation
of rounding errors is then an issue, in particular if one has to subtract large
contributions from each other. For that reason it is advisable to use higher
precision accuracy for these observables.
Often the resulting mean values of observables may be computed “on the
ﬂy.” However, it pays oﬀ to store as many of the intermediate results as
possible in order to allow for a careful a posteriori analysis of the statistical
properties.

4.5 Analyzing the data

93

4.5 Analyzing the data
The statistical analysis of the measured observables is the important ﬁnal
step of a Monte Carlo simulation. This analysis should also provide one with
the information how many updating sweeps have to be discarded before conﬁgurations in equilibrium are produced and how many sweeps are necessary
between two measurements. The ﬁnal product of the statistical analysis is
the average value which one quotes for an observable and an estimate for the
corresponding statistical error.
4.5.1 Statistical analysis for uncorrelated data
We assume that we have computed the values (x1 , x2 , . . . , xN ) of some observable for a Markov sequence of Monte Carlo-generated conﬁgurations in
equilibrium. Each of the values of the sample corresponds to a random variable Xi . All these variables have the same expectation value and variance:
)
(
2
2
2
= σX
Xi  = X , σX
=
(X
−
X
)
.
(4.53)
i
i
i
Candidates for unbiased estimators for these values are
N
1 

X=
Xi ,
N i=1

2
σ
X
=

N
2
1 

Xi − X
.
N − 1 i=1

(4.54)

If the Xi are uncorrelated one ﬁnds for i = j,
Xi Xj  = Xi  Xj  = X2

(4.55)

2
 To see
and the variance σ
X
allows one to determine the statistical error of X.

this ﬁrst note that the sample mean value X is an estimator for the correct
 = X. It is, however, itself a random variable, since its value
mean value: X
may change from one set of N conﬁgurations to another set. The variance of
that estimator is
2 ,
*
N
2 +
1 
2

X − X
σX =
(Xi − X)
(4.56)
=
N i=1
, N

1
1
1 
= 2
(Xi − X) (Xj − X) = X 2  − X2 + 2
Xi Xj  .
N
N
N
i,j=1
i=j

For uncorrelated Xi the contributions from i = j factorize due to (4.55) and
2
σX
 =

1 2
σ .
N X

(4.57)

This is the well-known result for uncorrelated measurements. Thus, for the
observable based on N measurements, the statistical error, i.e., the standard

94

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

deviation (s.d.), is σX . The value σX on the right-hand side of (4.57) is approximated using σ
X from (4.54). For the case of N uncorrelated measurements
one quotes the ﬁnal result as
 ±σ
X

with

σ
X
σ=√ .
N

(4.58)

The important
message of this equation is that the statistical error decreases
√
like 1/ N with the number N of uncorrelated conﬁgurations.

4.5.2 Autocorrelation
Since in our case the data sample is the result of a (computer-)time series in
our Monte Carlo simulation there is high chance that the observables are in
fact correlated. This so-called autocorrelation leads to a nonvanishing autocorrelation function, which we deﬁne as
CX (Xi , Xi+t ) = (Xi − Xi ) (Xi+t − Xi+t ) = Xi Xi+t  − Xi  Xi+t  .
(4.59)
For a Markov chain in equilibrium the autocorrelation function depends only
on the (computer time) separation t and we write
CX (t) = CX (Xi , Xi+t ) .

(4.60)

2
Note that CX (0) = σX
. In a typical situation the normalized correlation
function ΓX exhibits exponential behavior asymptotically for large t:


t
CX (t)
∼ exp −
,
(4.61)
ΓX (t) ≡
CX (0)
τX,exp

and one calls τX,exp the exponential autocorrelation time for X. The complete expression for ΓX (t) involves a sum over several such terms. In (4.61)
we consider only the asymptotically leading term with the largest autocorrelation time. This number provides information on how strongly subsequent
measurements are correlated. The exponential autocorrelation time τexp is the
supremum of the values τX,exp for all possible observables X:
τexp = sup τX,exp .

(4.62)

X

Autocorrelations lead to systematic errors which are O (exp(−t/τexp )) if the
computer time between subsequent measurements is t.
For correlated random variables Xi the terms with i = j in the second line
of (4.56) do not vanish and one can continue this equation to obtain for the
correlated case

4.5 Analyzing the data
2
σX̂
=

N
1 
1
CX (|i − j|) = 2
2
N i,j=1
N

N
−1


N −|t|



CX (|t|)

t=−(N −1) k=1
N




CX (0)
|t|
Γ
(|t|)
1
−
X
N2
N
N
t=−N 
t=−N

N
1 
σ2
σ2
+
≈ X 2
ΓX (|t|) ≡ X 2 τX,int ,
N
2 t=1
N
=

N

N − |t|

CX (|t|) =

95

(4.63)

where we have introduced the integrated autocorrelation time
N
1 
τX,int = +
ΓX (t) .
2 t=1

(4.64)

This deﬁnition is motivated by the observation that for exponential behavior
 ∞
N
1 
τX,int = +
ΓX (|t|) ≈
dt e−t/τ = τ (for large τ ) .
2 t=1
0

(4.65)

In the last step of (4.63) we have neglected the factor 1 − |t|/N which is
justiﬁed for large enough N due to the exponential suppression of ΓX (|t|).
Computing τX,int in a realistic situation one has to cut oﬀ sum (4.64) at
a value of t where the values of Γ (t) become unreliable. Usually one then
assumes exponential behavior for the part not explicitly taken into account
in the sum. Still, the determination of τexp or even τint is a delicate business.
Usually one needs at least 1000 τ data values for estimates of τ itself. In order
to judge whether the measured autocorrelation time is reliable, one therefore
should start with small size lattices and high statistics and work oneself up
to larger sizes, carefully checking the behavior and reliability of C(t).
2
The variance σX
 computed in this way is larger than the variance computed from (4.57), which assumes an uncorrelated sample. The number of
eﬀectively independent data out of N values is therefore
Nindep =

N
2 τX,int

(4.66)

or
2
2
σX,corrected
= 2 τX,int σX

 .

(4.67)

For equilibration from some start conﬁguration one should discard at least
20 τ , for good statistical accuracy maybe 1000 τ conﬁgurations. When producing data with 1% errors one typically needs > 10, 000 τ values. For more
detailed discussions, cf. [18–20].
Summing up our results we ﬁnd that for the correlated case the result one
quotes is given by
 ±σ
X

with

σ=

1
2 .
2 τX,int σ
X
N

(4.68)

96

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

Finally let us brieﬂy mention the issue of critical slowing down. The autocorrelation time depends on the updating algorithm but also on the parameters of the lattice system. For lattice ﬁeld systems one expects that
τX,int ∼ (ξX )z ,

τexp ∼ ξ z ,

(4.69)

where ξX is the correlation length for the observable X and ξ the longest
correlation length within the system. The correlation length is deﬁned from the
exponential decay of correlation functions between local observables measured
at diﬀerent points on the lattice, i.e., X(x)X(y) ∼ e−|x−y|/ξX for large |x−y|.
The dynamical critical exponent z ≥ 0 depends on the updating algorithm. At
critical points ξ approaches inﬁnity, however, on ﬁnite lattices of linear size
L one has ξ ≤ L. Thus, near a critical point, the computational eﬀort grows
like a power of the extension of the lattice:
numerical cost ∝ Lz .

(4.70)

This behavior is called critical slowing down. For ﬁrst-order phase transitions,
where the system may tunnel between diﬀerent phases, the autocorrelation
time grows like exp(c LD−1 ) for a D-dimensional lattice.
We summarize: From the data one has to get an estimate of the autocorrelation time. This provides (a) information on the number of update sweeps
to be discarded between measurements and (b) a correction factor to the
statistical error derived naively as for statistically independent data.
4.5.3 Techniques for smaller data sets
If it is too expensive to compute the autocorrelation time – and unfortunately
this is often the case in Monte Carlo calculations for quantum ﬁeld theory
problems – there are simpler statistical methods for obtaining at least some
estimate for the correlation of the data.
Data blocking methods: One divides the data into sub-blocks of data of
size K, computes the block mean values, and considers them as new variables Xi . The variance of these blocked Xi then should decrease like 1/K
if the original data were independent. One repeats this for a sequence
of diﬀerent values for K. As soon as the 1/K behavior is observed for
large enough K one may consider these block variables as statistically
independent.
Once the data (or the block results) can be considered independent, one
may determine the expectation values of the observables of interest and their
errors. Often, however, the number of data is too small to get a reliable estimate of the variance of the computed expectation values. Another obstacle
may be that error propagation is unreliable or impossible to determine. There
are two eﬃcient and easy-to-use methods dealing with both problems. Both
assume that the data are not correlated.

4.5 Analyzing the data

97

Statistical bootstrap: Given a set of N data, assume that we are interested
in some observable θ which may be estimated from that set. This observable can also be, e.g., the result of a ﬁt based on all N raw data. Let us
 One
call the value of the observable obtained from the original data set θ.
recreates from the sample repeatedly other samples by choosing randomly
N data out of the original set. This costs essentially nothing, since we just
recycle the original data set for the building of new sets. Let us assume
we have done this K times and thus have K sets of N data values each.
Of course some values will enter more than once in the new sets. For each
of these sets one computes the observable θ resulting in values θk with
k = 1, . . . , K. Then one determines
1
θ ≡
K

K


2
1 
θk − θ
.
K
K

θk ,

σθ2 ≡

k=1

(4.71)

k=1

These are estimators for θ and σθ2 . They are not unbiased and therefore
θ = θ for ﬁnite K. The diﬀerence is called bias and gives an idea on
how far away the result may be from the true θ. As ﬁnal result for the
observable one quotes θ = θ ± σθ.
Jackknife: We start with a data set of size N and an observable θ like for
the statistical bootstrap. The value of the observable computed for the
 One now constructs N subsets by removing
original set is again called θ.
the nth entry of the original set (n = 1, . . . , N ) and determines the value
θn for each set. Then
2
N −1 
θn − θ
.
N n=1
N

σθ2 ≡

(4.72)

The square root of the variance gives an estimate for the standard devia For the ﬁnal result one quotes either θ = θ ± σ  or replaces θ
tion of θ.
θ
by the unbiased estimator. The bias may be determined from
N
1 
θn ,
θ ≡
N n=1

(4.73)



leading to θ − (N − 1) θ − θ as the unbiased estimator for θ.
In a practical implementation both, statistical bootstrap and jackknife, may
be combined with blocking by organizing the data in blocks and constructing
subsets by removing blocks instead of only single values.
Another characteristic aspect of Monte Carlo simulations is the fact that
often the observables, one is interested in, are not simple averages but quantities that are obtained from a ﬁt. An example is the energy levels obtained
from an exponential ﬁt to a Euclidean correlator (see (1.1)). A single measurement of the correlator is ﬂuctuating far too much for a reasonable ﬁt. Thus

98

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory

one ﬁrst has to average many measurements of the correlator before the ﬁt
can be performed. However, for a naive determination of the error, one would
need many such sets of data for the correlator.
A powerful feature of the statistical bootstrap and the jackknife methods
is the fact that they can be applied to the determination of the statistical error
for ﬁtted quantities. Also the randomly chosen samples of the bootstrap and
the reduced samples of the jackknife method are large enough for performing
a ﬁt. Thus these two methods can be used for determining the errors for ﬁtted
quantities without the need for additional data or consideration of complicated
error propagation.
4.5.4 Some numerical exercises
The data have been determined from the Monte Carlo-generated gauge ﬁeld
conﬁgurations. Now one can start to explore physics. In this last section we
brieﬂy discuss two simple observables – the average plaquette and the static
potential as obtained from the correlator of Polyakov loops. These observables
are simple, can be calculated easily, and are well suited for a ﬁrst simulation
of a lattice gauge theory in an introductory course. We stress that the data
and methods presented here are not meant to be state of the art but illustrate
what can be achieved in a basic simulation.
Repeated Monte Carlo runs for diﬀerent gauge couplings and lattice sizes
provide an idea about the functional behavior of observables. As our ﬁrst
example let us consider the sum of plaquette variables as it enters the Wilson
gauge action (3.93) for the gauge group SU(N ),
SP [U ] =

1 
Re tr [UP ] ,
N

(4.74)

P

where the sum runs over all plaquettes, counting only one orientation. Its
expectation value is

D[U ] exp (β SP [U ]) SP [U ]

SP  =
.
(4.75)
D[U ] exp (β SP [U ])
Here we have used that the action S is related to SP by S[U ] = β (6|Λ| − SP [U ])
(see (3.93)). This relation allows one to cancel the constant term of the Boltzmann factor in the numerator with the same factor appearing in the normalization 1/Z. As a function of the inverse gauge coupling β one knows
SP  for small β from the strong coupling expansion and for large β from the
weak coupling expansion. Usually one plots the normalized quantity EP ≡
SP /(6|Λ|) which assumes values between 0 and 1 as in Fig. 4.2. The derivative dEP /dβ is related to the second and ﬁrst moments of SP , since from (4.75)
one ﬁnds
dSP 
= SP2  − SP 2 .
(4.76)
dβ

4.5 Analyzing the data

99

0.8
EP
0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

2

4

6

β

8

Fig. 4.2. The plaquette expectation value EP ≡ SP /(6|Λ|) as a function of β
for SU(3) gauge theory with Wilson gauge action on a 124 hypercubic lattice. The
data have been generated as discussed in the text, with increasing β in small steps.
For each step 50 equilibrating iterations have been done, followed by 200 groups of
one discarded update and one update with measurement. Although there appears
to be a maximum of the slope near β ≈ 5.7, further analysis shows that this is
not a signal of a phase transition. As far as numerics shows, the conﬁnement phase
for pure SU(3) lattice gauge theory case extends from β = 0 to the highest values
studied and presumably up to inﬁnity

This quantity is called the speciﬁc heat in analogy to statistical spin systems.
From these we know that the speciﬁc heat grows with the system’s correlation length. The quantity therefore is an indicator whether one approaches
a critical point in the phase landscape. Studying (4.75) and (4.76) for U(1)
gauge theory exhibits a (ﬁrst-order) phase transition near β ≈ 1 (for Wilson’s
action). For SU(2) and SU(3) no such signal has been seen although one does
observe a maximum at intermediate coupling values. This indicates a nearby
singularity in the multi-dimensional coupling space of actions.
The correlation function of Polyakov loops is related to the static quark
potential (compare (3.61)),


(4.77)
P (m)P (n)†  ∝ e−NT a V (r) 1 + O(e−NT aΔE ) ,
where r = |m − n|. Up to an irrelevant overall constant the potential is


(4.78)
aV (r) = − ln P (m)P (n)†  /NT .
The result of a determination of aV , based on this relation, is shown in the lefthand side plot of Fig. 4.3. We present the result of a straightforward evaluation
of the Polyakov loop correlation function with relatively low statistics, which
can be reproduced within a few hours on a PC.
We stress that state-of-the-art calculations are based on expectation values
of Wilson loops. Results with much higher statistics and more sophisticated

4 Numerical simulation of pure gauge theory
2

2

1.5

1
[V(r) − V(r0)] r0

a V(|n-m|)

100

1

0.5

0

0
continuum limit
β = 6.92
β = 6.4

−1

0

2

4
|n-m|

6

8

−2

0

0.5

1

1.5

r/r0

Fig. 4.3. The static potential V for SU(3) gauge theory in a pure gauge ﬁeld simulation with Wilson action. Left-hand side: values from the correlation of Polyakov
loops as obtained on a 163 × 6 lattice at β = 5.7 from 50,000 subsequent iterations;
this is shown just to demonstrate that main features can be seen already in such a
very simple analysis. Much better and more sophisticated methods have been used.
An example is shown in the right-hand side ﬁgure, where the values are derived
from the expectation values of Wilson loops [21]. Both r and V were made dimensionless using the Sommer parameter r0 (compare Chap. 3). (Right-hand side ﬁgure
reprinted from [21] with kind permission from Silvia Necco)

methods of analysis (e.g., [22, 23]) exist [21, 24, 25]. As an example of such
a calculation we show in the right-hand side plot the result from [21], where
diﬀerent lattice sizes and gauge couplings were used. The relation between
the results for diﬀerent gauge couplings is derived from the data and gives
information on the scaling properties (see Sect. 3.5 and Chap. 9).
Furthermore, using nonplanar Wilson loops (compare Fig. 3.3) one can
ﬁnd out whether the lattice system, although on a hypercubic grid, does recover rotational invariance as it should when approaching the continuum limit
(small lattice spacing, corresponding to large β). Figure 4.3 demonstrates that
this is indeed the case: Also points from oﬀ-axis distance vectors agree with
the overall shape. There one has chosen data for suﬃciently large lattice sizes
and values of β. Choosing smaller lattices and smaller β produces noticeable
deviations.

References
1. H. J. Rothe: Lattice Gauge Theories – An Introduction (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 1992) 77
2. N. Metropolis et al.: J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1087 (1953) 78

References

101

3. D. E. Knuth: The Art of Computer Programming, 2nd ed., Vol. 2 (AddisonWesley, Reading, Massachusetts 1981) 83, 84, 87
4. M. Lüscher: Comput. Phys. Commun. 79, 100 (1994) 84
5. W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery: Numerical
Recipes in C, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York 1999) 84, 87
6. M. Creutz: Phys. Rev. D 21, 2308 (1980) 85
7. S. L. Adler: Phys. Rev. D 23, 2901 (1981) 85
8. C. Whitmer: Phys. Rev. D 29, 306 (1984) 85
9. M. Creutz: Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1412 (1983) 85
10. D. J. E. Callaway and A. Rahman: Phys. Rev. D 28, 1506 (1983) 85
11. G. Parisi and Y.-S. Wu: Sci. Sin. 24, 483 (1981) 85
12. J. R. Klauder: in Recent Developments in High-Energy Physics; Acta Phys.
Austriaca Suppl. 25, edited by H. Mitter and C. B. Lang, p. 251 (Springer,
Wien, New York 1983) 85
13. P. H. Damgaard and H. Hüﬀel: Phys. Rep. 152, 227 (1987) 85
14. K. Fabricius and O. Haan: Phys. Lett. B 143, 459 (1984) 87
15. A. D. Kennedy and B. J. Pendleton: Phys. Lett. B 156, 393 (1985) 87
16. N. Cabibbo and E. Marinari: Phys. Lett. B 119, 387 (1982) 88
17. R. Petronzio and E. Vicari: Phys. Lett. B 248, 159 (1990) 89
18. B. A. Berg: Introduction to Markov Chain Monte Carlo Simulations and Their
Statistical Analysis (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore 2004) 95
19. A. D. Sokal: Monte Carlo Methods in Statistical Physics: Foundations and New
Algorithms, Lecture Notes Cours de Troisieme Cycle de la Physique en Suisse
Romande, Lausanne, Switzerland (unpublished, 1989) 95
20. U. Wolﬀ: In: H. Gausterer, C. B. Lang (eds.) Computational Methods in Field
Theory, Lect. Notes Phys. 409, 127. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York
(1992) 95
21. S. Necco: Ph.D. thesis, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Germany,
arXiv:heplat/0306005 (2003) 100
22. M. Lüscher and P. Weisz: JHEP 0109, 010 (2001) 100
23. M. Lüscher and P. Weisz: JHEP 0207, 049 (2002) 100
24. G. Bali: Phys. Rep. 343, 1 (2001) 100
25. P. Majumdar: Nucl. Phys. B 664, 213 (2003) 100

