6
Hadron spectroscopy

The simplest quantities involving fermions that one can compute on the lattice
are the masses of hadrons. Since there are many combinations of quantum
numbers such as spin, parity, ﬂavor content etc. there is a wealth of possible
hadrons. Reproducing all their masses correctly is already a powerful test for
the correctness of QCD. Over the last 20 years lattice QCD calculations of
the mass spectrum have improved continually and, for ground state baryons,
have reached impressive agreement with experimental data.
In this chapter we discuss the conceptual background and the actual implementation of a numerical spectroscopy calculation. The hadron correlation
functions are not only necessary for computing the spectrum but enter also
in the determination of hadronic matrix elements addressed in later chapters.
We ﬁrst discuss how to construct operators with the correct quantum numbers and their correlation functions and address the quenched approximation.
Subsequently we present techniques for quark sources and show how quark
propagators can be computed. We continue with the analysis of the resulting
hadron propagators and discuss how to obtain the hadron masses.

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators
In a typical QCD calculation one generates gauge conﬁgurations according
to the requested distribution and then computes various observables. These
include simple expectation values of plaquettes or of more extended operators
such as Wilson loops. Also quantities like the chiral condensate ψψ have
been studied and will be discussed in later chapters.
Here we concentrate on determining hadron masses, i.e., we perform a
hadron spectroscopy calculation. For this purpose one ﬁrst computes quark
propagators for each gauge conﬁguration. These are then suitably combined
to construct the hadron propagators. Finally, averaging over all gauge conﬁgurations provides our estimate of the hadron propagators for subsequent
analysis.
Gattringer, C., Lang, C.B.: Hadron Spectroscopy. Lect. Notes Phys. 788, 123–156
(2010)
c Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010

DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-01850-3 6

124

6 Hadron spectroscopy

The ﬁrst step of such a spectroscopy calculation is the identiﬁcation of
hadron interpolators O, O such that the corresponding Hilbert space operators
 O
 † annihilate and create the particle states we want to analyze. A hadron
O,
interpolator is a functional of the lattice ﬁelds with the quantum numbers
of the state one is interested in.1 Once the interpolators are identiﬁed we
consider the Euclidean correlator (1.12) of hadron interpolators O(nt ), O(0)
located at time slices n4 = nt and n4 = 0.
For hadron spectroscopy one studies interpolators constructed out of
quarks and gluons. These are by construction gauge-invariant color singlets.
Such operators include:
•
•
•
•
•

Local meson operators, like OM (n) ≡ ψ(n)Γ ψ(n), consisting of quarks and
antiquarks or baryon operators made out of three quarks; these should give
information on the mesons and baryons as predicted by QCD.
Extended interpolators, also contributing to hadron propagators, involving, e.g., for mesons terms like ψ(n)Uμ (n)ψ(n+ μ̂) and similar for baryons.
Pure gauge ﬁeld interpolators like the plaquette, longer closed loops, or
more general gluonic operators. These interpolators couple to gluonic objects such as glueballs, but also to mesons.
Other, more exotic color-singlet combinations of quarks and antiquarks
like ψψψψ and ψψψψψ.
States with 3n quarks; these are just the nuclei. For example, the deuterium is a proton–neutron state made out of six valence quarks, three of
up-type and three of down-type.

According to (1.21), physically allowed states can be observed in the spectral decomposition of the propagators of these interpolators,



 † |0 e−nt a Ek
0|O|kk|
O
O(nt ) O(0) =
k




= A e−nt a EH 1 + O e−nt a ΔE ,

(6.1)


where A is a constant, EH is the energy of the lowest state |H with 0|O|H
=
0, and ΔE is the energy diﬀerence to the ﬁrst excited state. From the leading
exponential decay we thus can extract the energy EH of the hadron.
6.1.1 Meson interpolators
The discrete symmetries which we have discussed in Sect. 5.4 play an important role in the classiﬁcation of hadrons and are needed for the construction
of hadron interpolators. To illustrate their use we discuss as an example the
construction of pion interpolators in more detail. Other meson interpolators
can then be constructed along the same lines with the help of Table 6.1, which
lists the quantum numbers of fermion bilinears.
1

According to common practice, we will often use “operator” and “interpolator”
synonymously in the following.

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators

125

To be speciﬁc, we consider QCD with only two or three ﬂavors (up, down,
strange). Instead of using a ﬂavor index f attached to spinors denoted by
ψ, ψ, we often use a diﬀerent symbol for each ﬂavor. Thus u, u, d, d and s, s
denote the spinors for the three light ﬂavors.
The pions, which we now consider in our example, are made from u and d
quarks only. An up-quark u has isospin I = 1/2, Iz = + 1/2 and charge Q = 2/3 e,
where in our convention the charge of the electron is −e. For the down-quark
d we have I = 1/2, Iz = − 1/2 and Q = − 1/3 e. The pseudoscalar combinations
can be classiﬁed with respect to their isospin and are grouped into an isotriplet (I = 1) containing the particles π + , π0 , π − with isospin components
Iz = 1, 0, −1 and an iso-singlet (I = 0) containing the η-meson.2
The charged pions π + and π − have a mass of 140 MeV. They have zero
spin (J = 0), negative parity (P = −1), isospin I = 1, Iz = ±1, and electric
charge Q = ±e. Thus, for obtaining the correct charge and isospin, π + must
be a d–u combination and π − is of the type u–d. We also expect them to
be color singlets. More explicitly we can use the pseudoscalar interpolators
(summation convention for all indices)
Oπ+ (n) = d(n) γ5 u(n) = d(n) α (γ5 )αβ u(n) β ,
c

c

Oπ− (n) = u(n) γ5 d(n) = u(n) α (γ5 )αβ d(n) β .
c

(6.2)

c

For their transformation under parity (5.72) we ﬁnd
Oπ+ (n, n4 ) = d(n, n4 ) γ5 u(n, n4 )
P

−→ d(−n, n4 ) γ4 γ5 γ4 u(−n, n4 ) = −d(−n, n4 ) γ5 u(−n, n4 )
= −Oπ+ (−n, n4 ) ,
(6.3)
showing that our interpolator Oπ+ indeed has negative parity (the same holds
for Oπ− ). The fact that the parity transformation changes the spatial vector
n into −n is irrelevant for interpolators where we project to zero momentum,
i.e., where we sum over all n (see Sect. 6.1.4). Applying charge conjugation
(5.66) gives
C

Oπ+ (n) = d(n) γ5 u(n) −→ −d(n)T Cγ5 C −1 u(n)T = −d(n)T γ5T u(n)T
= u(n) γ5 d(n) = Oπ− (n) ,

(6.4)

where we used Cγ5 C −1 = γ5T , which follows from (5.67). The interchange
of the Grassmann variables cancels the overall minus sign. Equation (6.4)
establishes that charge conjugation transforms Oπ+ into Oπ− and vice versa.
The interpolator for the Iz = 0 component of the iso-triplet, the π 0 , is

1 
Oπ0 (n) = √ u(n) γ5 u(n) − d(n) γ5 d(n) .
2
2

We remark that the physical η also has an admixture of ss. See, e.g., [1].

(6.5)

126

6 Hadron spectroscopy

Table 6.1. Quantum numbers of the most commonly used meson interpolators
according to the general form (6.9). We remark that the classiﬁcation with respect
to C is for the ﬂavor neutral interpolators only
JPC

State
Scalar
Pseudoscalar
Vector
Axial vector
Tensor

++

0
0−+
1−−
1++
1+−

Γ

Particles

1 , γ4
γ5 , γ4 γ5
γi , γ4 γi
γi γ5
γi γj

f0 , a0 , K0∗ , . . .
π ± , π 0 , η, K ± , K 0 , . . .
ρ± , ρ0 , ω, K ∗ , φ, . . .
a1 , f 1 , . . .
h1 , b 1 , . . .

The iso-singlet state (I = 0), the η-meson, is described by the interpolator

1 
Oη (n) = √ u(n) γ5 u(n) + d(n) γ5 d(n) .
2

(6.6)

The properties of Oπ0 and Oη under the parity transformation are the same
as for the interpolators Oπ± , i.e., they have P = −1. Concerning charge
conjugation, Oπ0 and Oη are eigenstates with C = +1.
Other mesons diﬀer from the examples we have discussed so far by their
ﬂavor content as well as by spin and parity. We can, e.g., obtain the interpolator for the strange K + meson from the interpolator for π + , by replacing the
d quark with an s quark,
OK + (n) = s(n) γ5 u(n) .

(6.7)

Diﬀerent spin and parity correspond to diﬀerent gamma matrices in the
fermionic bilinears. For example we obtain from the interpolator for π + the
interpolator for the ρ+ vector meson (I = 1, Iz = +1, Q = +e, J = 1, P = −1)
by replacing γ5 with γi , i = 1, 2, 3:
Oρ+ (n)i = d(n) γi u(n) , i = 1, 2, 3 .

(6.8)

A general local meson interpolator has the form
OM (n) = ψ (f1 ) (n) Γ ψ (f2 ) (n) ,

(6.9)

where Γ is a monomial of gamma matrices, and we have for this equation
switched back to the notation with upper ﬂavor indices fi . In the case of
degenerate ﬂavors (f1 = f2 ) combinations of (6.9) are formed to obtain the
desired ﬂavor symmetries, as was done in our interpolators for π 0 and η in
(6.5) and (6.6). In Table 6.1 we list the matrices Γ for the most commonly
used interpolators together with the corresponding quantum numbers. We
remark that in addition to the local interpolators gauge-invariant combinations of quarks and antiquarks at diﬀerent lattice sites may also be used. (See
Sects. 6.2.2 and 6.2.3.)

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators

127

6.1.2 Meson correlators
So far we have constructed the interpolator OM that corresponds to the operM acting in the physical Hilbert space. For the Euclidean correlator we
ator O
 † which generates the
also need to ﬁnd the interpolator corresponding to O
M
meson state from the vacuum. In order to identify this operator we formally
conjugate the interpolator (6.9) (we drop the space–time argument n here),


ψ (f1 ) Γ ψ (f2 )

†

†

†

= −ψ (f2 ) Γ † ψ (f1 ) ≡ −ψ (f2 ) γ4 Γ † γ4 ψ (f1 ) = ±ψ (f2 ) Γ ψ (f1 ) .

(6.10)
The minus sign in the ﬁrst step comes from the interchange of the Grassmann
variables. In the second step we have used the relation ψ = ψ † γ4 which holds
for the operators in Hilbert space and performed the equivalent replacement
for the Grassmann spinors in our interpolator. The last step in (6.10) reﬂects
the simple algebraic property γ4 Γ † γ4 = ±Γ . Thus, up to a possible overall
 † is obtained by interchanging
sign, the interpolator that corresponds to O
M
ψ’s and ψ’s and ordering the ψ to the left. The sign is irrelevant for the
exponential decay in (6.1). Thus, for mesons we use interpolators
OM (n) = ψ (f1 ) (n) Γ ψ (f2 ) (n) ,

OM (m) = ψ (f2 ) (m) Γ ψ (f1 ) (m) ,

(6.11)

combined in correlators OM (n) OM (m). At the moment the space–time arguments m, n are arbitrary and only later we will set the time arguments to
m4 = 0 and n4 = nt to match the form of the hadron correlator (6.1). In
Sect. 6.1.4 we will discuss what to do with the spatial components m, n.
For evaluating the correlators we have to compute the Grassmann integrals
that appear when calculating the fermionic part . . .F of the expectation
value (compare (5.2)). In this step there is an important diﬀerence between
the correlators for iso-triplet operators such as (6.2) and (6.5) and correlators
for an iso-singlet operator such as (6.6). For an iso-triplet operator of the form
OT = d Γ u we ﬁnd (summation convention is used for all indices)


OT (n) OT (m) F = d(n)Γ u(n) u(m)Γ d(m) F
*
+
= Γα1 β1 Γα2 β2 d(n) α1 u(n) β1 u(m) α2 d(m) β2
c1
c1
c2
c2 F
*
+ *
+
= −Γα1 β1 Γα2 β2 u(n) β1 u(m) α2
d(m) β2 d(n) α1
c1
c2 u
c2
−1
−1
= −Γα1 β1Γα2 β2 Du (n|m) β1 α2 Dd (m|n) β2 α1
c1 c2
c2 c1
!
= − tr Γ Du−1 (n|m) Γ Dd−1 (m|n) .

c1

d

(6.12)

In the third line of this equation we have reordered the Grassmann variables
and then used the fact that the fermionic expectation value factorizes with
respect to the ﬂavors: . . .F = . . .u . . .d . Subsequently we applied Wick’s

128

6 Hadron spectroscopy

m

n

m

n

Fig. 6.1. Connected (left-hand side plot) and disconnected (right-hand side plot)
pieces of a meson correlator

theorem (5.36) for each of the two ﬂavors (compare also (5.54)). This step is
often referred to as fermion contraction.
The Dirac operators Du , Dd for u and d quark diﬀer only by the value
of the mass parameter (compare (5.51)). Often the small diﬀerence between
the u and the d quark masses is ignored and one uses Du = Dd , i.e., exact
isospin symmetry. It is, however, important to keep in mind that also in this
case, only Grassmann variables with equal ﬂavor can be contracted with each
other.
The result in the last line of (6.12) has a simple interpretation: The propagator Du−1 (n|m) propagates a u quark from space–time point m to the point n,
while the propagator Dd−1 (m|n) transports a d quark in the opposite direction. Such a contribution is referred to as connected piece and is depicted in
the left-hand side plot of Fig. 6.1. We remark that each of the individual lines
in this ﬁgure symbolizes a collection of fermion lines (cf. Fig. 5.1). √
In the correlator of an iso-singlet operator OS = (uΓ u + dΓ d)/ 2, such
as (6.6), also another type of contribution appears. The fermion contractions
for this correlator are obtained by following the same steps as in (6.12),


!
1
tr Γ Du−1 (n|m)Γ Du−1 (m|n)
2
!
!
1
+ tr Γ Du−1 (n|n) tr Γ Du−1 (m|m)
(6.13)
2
!
!
1
+ tr Γ Du−1 (n|n) tr Γ Dd−1 (m|m) + u ↔ d .
2

OS (n) OS (m) F = −

The ﬁrst type of contribution are the connected pieces we have already discussed. However, one also gets propagators Du−1 (n|n), Du−1 (m|m) which transport a u quark from a space time-point back to the same point. Such terms
are called disconnected pieces and are depicted in the right-hand side plot of
Fig. 6.1. Numerically these contributions need more computational eﬀort and
higher statistics than the connected parts and many studies avoid considering
such mesons or drop the disconnected pieces.
√
We remark that the interpolator OT,Iz =0 = (uΓ u−dΓ d)/ 2 for the Iz = 0
component of the iso-triplet diﬀers from the singlet interpolator only by a
relative minus sign between the u and the d terms (compare (6.5) and (6.6)).
The corresponding correlator is like in (6.13), but with a minus sign in the
third term. In the case of exact isospin symmetry, Du = Dd , the disconnected
pieces cancel. The resulting correlator is the same as for the other members

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators

129

of the triplet (compare (6.12)), implying that the masses of all triplet states
are degenerate. In nature this degeneracy is quite accurate, since mπ± = 140
MeV and mπ0 = 135 MeV. The small discrepancy is due to slightly diﬀerent
masses for u and d quarks and electroweak corrections.
6.1.3 Interpolators and correlators for baryons
Baryons are objects made out of three valence quarks. Baryon interpolators
O with well-deﬁned quantum numbers have to be constructed such that the
 in (6.1) projects onto the state we are
corresponding Hilbert space operator O
interested in. As for the case of mesons we ﬁrst discuss an example in detail,
the construction of nucleon interpolators, and then address other baryons. A
review on baryon interpolators, going beyond our introductory presentation,
can be found in [2].
The proton p and the neutron n are the Iz = + 1/2 and Iz = − 1/2 components of an iso-doublet (I = 1/2). Their almost degenerate masses of mp = 938
MeV and mn = 940 MeV demonstrate again that isospin is a good symmetry,
as we already stressed for the pion system. The proton has electric charge
Q = e, while the neutron has vanishing charge. Consequently the proton is a
uud state and the neutron is of the type ddu. Due to the facts that the electric
charge is irrelevant in QCD and p and n are strongly related by isospin symmetry, usually one does not distinguish between the two and refers to them
simply as nucleons. We discuss only the uud-type interpolator (Iz = 1/2). The
Iz = − 1/2 component is obtained by interchanging u and d.
The simplest interpolator for the nucleon N is given by


(6.14)
ON (n) = abc u(n)a u(n)Tb Cγ5 d(n)c .
In this equation we show explicitly only the color indices a, b, c, while for the
Dirac indices we use vector/matrix notation. The transposition T acts on the
Dirac indices and turns the column 4-spinor u(n)b into a row spinor u(n)Tb .
Summing the color indices with the epsilon tensor makes the interpolator
a color singlet and gauge-invariant, as follows from the action of a gauge
transformation on the fermions (2.30) and (3.31).
The term in the parentheses combines a u and a d quark into a so-called
diquark, using the charge conjugation matrix C and γ5 . The diquark has
isospin I = 0 and spin J = 0. The notion diquark here serves to discuss
the quantum numbers and no dynamical meaning is implied. Thus the full
interpolator ON has I = 1/2, Iz = + 1/2 and J = 1/2 as needed for the nucleon.
The last quantum number we have to discuss is parity, which is P = +1
for proton and neutron. Under the parity transformation P (see (5.72)) our
nucleon interpolator ON (n) transforms as
P
ON
(n, n4 ) = abc γ4 u(−n, n4 )a u(−n, n4 )Tb γ4T Cγ5 γ4 d(−n, n4 )c
= abc γ4 u(−n, n4 )a u(−n, n4 )Tb Cγ5 d(−n, n4 )c = γ4 ON (−n, n4 ) , (6.15)

130

6 Hadron spectroscopy

where in the second step we used γμT C = −Cγμ (compare (A.23)). As for
mesons, the change of the spatial vector n into −n is irrelevant when we
project to zero momentum, i.e., when we sum over all n (see Sect. 6.1.4).
The nontrivial transformation of the spinor indices with γ4 can be taken into
account by considering the combinations
ON± (n) =




1
P
ON (n) ± ON
(n) = abc P± u(n)a u(n)Tb Cγ5 d(n)c , (6.16)
2

where the parity projectors P± are deﬁned as
P± = 12 (1 ± γ4 ) .

(6.17)

After projection to zero momentum, the interpolators in (6.16) have definite parity P = ±1. The interpolator ON+ describes the positive parity nucleon, while ON− couples to its negative parity partner N (1535) with a mass
of 1535 MeV.
Similar to the steps performed for the meson correlator in (6.10), one ﬁnds
that the interpolator for the corresponding creation operator is given by (up
to an overall sign)


ON± (n) = abc u(n)a Cγ5 d(n)Tb u(n)c P± .
(6.18)
Interpolators for other spin- 1/2 baryons are obtained by changing the ﬂavor
content. Furthermore, diﬀerent diquark structures can be considered and we
obtain more general spin- 1/2 interpolators:




T
ON± = abc P± Γ A ua uTb Γ B dc , ON± = abc u a Γ B db u c Γ A P± ,




OΣ± = abc P± Γ A ua uTb Γ B sc , OΣ± = abc u a Γ B sTb u c Γ A P± ,




OΞ± = abc P± Γ A sa sTb Γ B uc , OΞ± = abc sa Γ B u Tb sc Γ A P± ,







OΛ± = abc P± Γ A 2sa uTb Γ B dc + da uTb Γ B sc − ua dTb Γ B sc ,
 
 
 T



OΛ± = abc 2 u Ta Γ B db sc + u Ta Γ B sb dc − da Γ B sb u c Γ A P±,(6.19)
where we list the interpolators for nucleon, for the strange Σ (I = 1, S = −1),
Ξ (I = 1/2, S = −2), and Λ (I = 0, S = −1) baryons of both parities. Three
+
possible choices for the matrices Γ A and Γ B , all giving rise to J P = 1/2 , are
(Γ A , Γ B ) = (1, Cγ5 ), (γ5 , C), or (1, iγ4 Cγ5 ).
Baryons with spin J = 3/2 can be obtained by using (Γ A , Γ B ) = (1, Cγj ).
The spatial gamma matrix γj gives rise to a diquark with spin J = 1 and
together with the quark outside the diquark the resulting interpolator has
spin J = 3/2 contributions, but also an admixture of spin J = 1/2. For the
details of the necessary projection to deﬁnite spin we refer to [2].
Note that all our baryon interpolators OB± and OB± still have an open
Dirac index – they describe fermions after all. Usually this index is summed
over and one considers correlators of the type (α is summed)

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators



OB± (n)α OB± (m)α .

131

(6.20)

We conclude with displaying as an example the fermion contractions for
the nucleon interpolator (6.14) (we use P±2 = P± and vector/matrix notation),


ON± (n)α ON± (m)α F = − ON± (m)α ON± (n)α F





= − abc a b c u(m)a Cγ5 d(m)Tb u(m)c P± u(n)c u(n)Ta Cγ5 d(n)b F
= abc a b c (Cγ5 )α β  (Cγ5 )αβ (P± )γγ  Dd−1 (n|m) β  β ×
(6.21)
b b


Du−1 (n|m) α α Du−1 (n|m) γ  γ − Du−1 (n|m) α γ Du−1 (n|m) γ  α ,
a a

c c

a c

c a

demonstrating that for baryons only connected pieces occur.
6.1.4 Momentum projection
There is a ﬁnal step to be implemented for our hadron interpolators: We want
our hadron states to be states of deﬁnite spatial momentum p. Thus we deﬁne

 nt ) =  1
O(n, nt ) e−i a n p .
O(p,
|Λ3 | n∈Λ3

(6.22)

Note that this Fourier transformation runs only over the spatial components n
in the spatial lattice Λ3 = {n = (n1 , n2 , n3 ) | ni = 0, 1, . . . , N−1}. Accordingly,
the momenta p are spatial momenta with components pi = 2πki /(aN ), ki =
 nt ) is projected to deﬁnite
−N/2 + 1, . . . , N/2. Thus, the interpolator O(p,
spatial momentum and is located on a single time slice nt .
It is suﬃcient to project only one of the two interpolators of a correlation
function to deﬁnite momentum, typically the operator O(n, nt ) at the sink.
The source operator O(0, 0) can remain in real space and usually is placed
at the origin. That this is suﬃcient can be seen by writing the real space
interpolator O as a sum of its Fourier components (compare (A.37)) and
using the fact that states with diﬀerent momenta are orthogonal to each other
such that only the zero momentum term survives. Note, however, that this
is strictly correct only for the exact expectation values, whereas it is only
approximate for a sum over a ﬁnite number of conﬁgurations.
Thus, according to (1.21), our ﬁnal formula for Euclidean hadron correlators with deﬁnite momentum p reads
)
(


 nt ) O(0, 0) =  1
e−ianp O(n, nt ) O(0, 0)
O(p,
|Λ3 | n∈Λ3



(6.23)
= A e−ant E(p) 1 + O e−ant ΔE ,
where the energy E(p) is related to the hadron mass mH through the relativistic dispersion relation (in our units the speed of light is c = 1)

132

6 Hadron spectroscopy

E(p) =

'
m2H + p2 (1 + O(ap)) ,

(6.24)

and for zero momentum we ﬁnd E(0) = mH .
Determining the hadron propagators for non-zero momenta allows one to
study the spectral relation between energy and momentum as realized on the
lattice. Since the asymptotic states describe free particles in the lattice world,
the adequate spectral relation is that of free lattice particles. It may be obtained, e.g., from the free boson (or fermion) lattice propagator in momentum
space. For the simplest, nearest neighbor discretization one identiﬁes the pole
at momentum (iE(p), p) and ﬁnds the relation (mH = E(0))
cosh (a E(p)) = cosh(a mH ) +

3


(1 − cos(a pk )) ,

(6.25)

k=1

which approaches the continuum relation for vanishing lattice spacing a, cf.
(6.24). Careful analysis of hadron propagators along these lines allows one to
check for the recovery of full Euclidean invariance.
6.1.5 Final formula for hadron correlators
Central for obtaining results to be compared with experiment are the correlation functions of products of ﬁelds. For any product of operators, denoted
by A, one has to evaluate

1
A = AF G =
D[U ] e−SG [U ] D[ψ, ψ] e−SF [ψ,ψ,U ] A[ψ, ψ, U ] . (6.26)
Z
The integral over the Grassmann variables can be computed in closed form
(see Chap. 5) and the integral (5.4) over the gauge ﬁeld remains.
For deﬁniteness let us discuss the example of a propagator for a meson
built out of two quark ﬂavors as in (6.12). After the Grassmann integration
we end up with a ratio of purely bosonic integrals over the gauge ﬁelds,


1
OT (n) OT (m) = −
D[U ] e−SG [U ] det[Du ] det[Dd ]
Z
!
× tr Γ Du−1 (n|m) Γ Dd−1 (m|n) ,

(6.27)
Z = D[U ] e−SG [U ] det[Du ] det[Dd ] .
We stress again that the fermion determinants depend on U and one has to
perform a Monte Carlo simulation using Z −1 exp(−SG [U ]) det[Du ] det[Dd ] as
the distribution weight for the gauge ﬁelds. This seems to be a straightforward task at ﬁrst sight. However, computing the determinant of the Dirac
operator matrix D is highly nontrivial. Remember that this matrix has 12 |Λ|
rows and columns, where |Λ| is the number of lattice sites. This dimension
therefore is typically of the order of millions and a brute force calculation of
the determinant is prohibitively expensive.

6.1 Hadron interpolators and correlators

133

6.1.6 The quenched approximation
Following the ﬁrst applications of the Monte Carlo method to lattice QCD,
most of the results in the 1980s and 1990s were obtained in the quenched
approximation.3 In particular the successful determination of the ground state
spectrum of hadrons with light quarks is a milestone of this approach.
Before discussing the quenched approximation, let us brieﬂy remind ourselves of the physical interpretation of the determinant factor. From the hopping expansion discussed in Chap. 5, we found that it may be written as an
eﬀective action, which is a sum over closed loops of gauge ﬁeld link variables.
In essence it describes the fermionic vacuum where virtual pairs of quarks and
antiquarks are created and annihilated. These quarks are usually called sea
quarks, since they are related to Dirac’s picture of a fermion sea, where the
holes denote anti-fermions. Of course sea quarks are identical to generic quarks
and we only call them such for clariﬁcation of the subsequent approximation.
Putting the fermion determinants to unity by hand corresponds to neglecting the eﬀect of the vacuum quark loops (Sect. 5.3.2). Actually, since in
the expansion of the determinant the leading term of the eﬀective action is
a sum over plaquettes, part of the eﬀective action is intrinsically included in
the gauge action by redeﬁning the gauge coupling. This is no problem, since
the gauge coupling itself is a bare parameter and only physical quantities are
of relevance.
Omitting the determinants deﬁnes the quenched approximation. Instead
of using the full expression for, e.g., the meson correlator (6.27), one computes

!

1
D[U ] e−SG [U ] tr Γ Du−1 (n|m) Γ Dd−1 (m|n) ,
OT (n) OT (m) quenched = −
Z

Z = D[U ] e−SG [U ] .
(6.28)
In this approximation one constructs the Markov chain of gauge conﬁgurations
as for pure gauge theory (compare Chap. 3) and evaluates the quark propagators on those conﬁgurations. Combinations of the quark propagators build up
the hadron correlators as discussed in the last section. In order to distinguish
these propagating quarks from the sea quarks, and since they are responsible
for the quantum numbers of the hadron, they are called valence quarks. The
quenched approximation is therefore also called valence approximation.
The quenched approximation may be considered as the limit, in which the
sea quarks become inﬁnitely heavy and therefore cannot be generated from
the vacuum as particle–antiparticle pairs. This can be seen from the hopping
expansion for the fermion determinant (5.65). Since the expansion parameter
κ deﬁned in (5.55) vanishes for m → ∞, the determinant becomes 1 in this
limit.
3

The terms come from quenching – rapid cooling – of steel, where the carbon
atoms are frozen to their random positions.

134

6 Hadron spectroscopy

m

n

m

n

Fig. 6.2. Sample of quark lines contributing in hadron propagation (mesons l.h.s.,
baryons r.h.s.). In the quenched approximation only contributions in the upper two
rows, i.e., without sea quark loops (= closed loops) contribute. The diagrams in
the second row appear in the quenched approximation and resemble the dynamical
diagrams in the bottom rows. They are called hairpin diagrams and give rise to
logarithmic singularities in the quenched approximation

A simulation including the determinant and therefore allowing for the full
dynamical vacuum structure of fermions is called a simulation with dynamical
quarks, in contrast to the quenched simulation. Figure 6.2 gives examples for
contributing quark lines in the quenched and the fully dynamical simulation.
In full QCD there is no diﬀerence between sea quarks and valence quarks.
However, in our computer laboratory we may give them diﬀerent masses.
Such intermediate stages, where the masses of the sea quarks and the valence
quarks diﬀer, are called partial quenching, and are sometimes useful for a
better control of the various systematic uncertainties.
We remark that neither the quenched nor the partially quenched approximation are proper quantum ﬁeld theories with a valid Hilbert space construction and correct positivity properties for the fermions. This leads to some
problems in analyzing in particular the results toward small quark masses.
Forbidding dynamical fermion loops also prevents one from studying resonances. However, these provide a conceptual problem anyhow. They are
not asymptotic states of the ﬁeld theory and one has to introduce intricate
tools for their identiﬁcation and the determination of scattering amplitudes
in general (cf. Chap. 11). We expect, however, that resonances should in the
quenched case to leading order be observed as bound states at nearby energy
values.
Since dynamical simulations will be treated in Chap. 8, in this chapter
we will show exclusively results for the hadron spectrum in the quenched
situation. Obviously these are of much higher statistical precision than those
obtained from simulations with dynamical quarks, albeit with the intrinsic
uncertainty of the eﬀect of quenching. Special features due to quenching (like
occurrence of extra singularities and ghosts) will be discussed in Sect. 6.4.3.

6.2 Strategy of the calculation

135

We stress, however, that most of the formulas and techniques presented in
this chapter apply to both quenched and dynamical simulations.

6.2 Strategy of the calculation
In this section we discuss techniques for computing and storing the quark
propagators needed for the hadron correlators presented in the last section.
We describe the construction of realistic quark sources which improve the
overlap of the lattice hadron interpolators with the physical states. The problem of exceptional conﬁgurations and its amelioration through smoothing of
the gauge ﬁeld are addressed.
6.2.1 The need for quark sources
A complete quark propagator is a matrix as large as the fermion matrix itself.
Depending on the lattice action, the Dirac operator may be sparse, with many
vanishing entries, but the propagator D−1 is not and consists of O(1012 )
complex numbers. Each entry D−1 (n|m) βα
ba connects a source point (m, α, a)
with a sink point (n, β, b). Here the notion “point” relates to site- as well
as Dirac and color indices. Since the matrix provides the information for
propagation in one particular gauge ﬁeld conﬁguration, its entries will be
highly correlated and this correlation reduces the information content. So for
two reasons one does not try to store the complete propagator matrix: It is
wasteful to calculate all entries and it would need too much computer memory.
However, if we consider instead just the propagator from a ﬁxed site m0 ,
a ﬁxed Dirac index α0 , and a ﬁxed color index a0 , to any site of the lattice,
this is just one column of the inverse Dirac operator,

(m ,α ,a )
D−1 (n|m) βα S0 0 0 0 (m) α ,
(6.29)
D−1 (n|m0 ) βα0 =
ba0

ba

m,α,a

a

where we have introduced the so-called point sources
(m ,α0 ,a0 )

S0 0

(m) α = δ(m − m0 ) δαα0 δaa0 .

(6.30)

a

The expression (6.29) must be evaluated for 12 sources, one for each combination α0 , a0 of Dirac and color indices. The point sources are placed at the
position m0 of the source interpolator OH (m0 ) and the column D−1 (n|m0 ) is
the propagator to the position n of the sink operator OH (n).
Since mesons contain a backward running antiquark (compare Fig. 6.1),
one also needs the propagator in the other direction, i.e., from n to m0 . Naively
one would expect that this requires placing sources also at n. However, we
can utilize γ5 -hermiticity, as discussed in Sect. 5.4.3, in order to obtain the
backward running propagator for free.

136

6 Hadron spectroscopy

Using this symmetry property we may write (repeated indices are summed)
γ5 D−1 γ5 = D−1

†

⇐⇒

∗

(γ5 )αα D−1 (m0 |n) α β  (γ5 )β  β = D−1 (n|m0 ) βα ,
dc

cd

(6.31)
and so obtain the backward running propagator. This can, e.g., be used to
write the iso-triplet pion propagator (6.12) as

!
OT (n) OT (m0 )F = − tr D−1(n|m0 )γ5 D−1(m0 |n)γ5 = − |D−1(n|m0 ) αβ |2.
cd

α,β,c,d

(6.32)
This example shows explicitly that for the pion, and similarly for other mesons,
only the forward propagator D−1 (n|m0 ) needs to be calculated. For baryons
we only need forward propagating quarks anyhow (compare (6.21)).
6.2.2 Point source or extended source?
In order to get clear and strong correlation signals, which allow a reliable
analysis, we have to optimize the interpolating ﬁelds. Although any operator
with the correct quantum numbers contributes to the physical state, some may
be more important than others. The overlap can be improved considerably by
providing more realistic spatial wave functions. We present the idea using
a meson interpolator as an example, but the generalization to baryons is
straightforward.
We consider a meson interpolator on a single ﬁxed time slice nt , located
at n0 = (n0 , nt ). A more general wave function may be introduced by writing


F (n0 ; n1 , n2 ) α1 α2 ψ (f ) (n1 , nt ) α1 ψ (f ) (n2 , nt ) α2 , (6.33)
OM (n0 ) =
a1 a2

n1 ,n2

a1

a2

where we have introduced a distribution function F (n0 ; n1 , n2 ) which combines ﬁeld values ψ(n1 , nt ) and ψ(n2 , nt ) at spatial positions n1 , n2 in the
vicinity of n0 . In the simplest case, where the complete interpolator is localized on the single site n0 = (n0 , nt ), F reduces to
F (n0 ; n1 , n2 ) α1 α2 = δ(n0 − n1 ) δα0 α1 δa0 a1 Γα0 β0 δ(n0 − n2 ) δβ0 α2 δa0 a2
a1 a2

⇒



OM (n0 ) = ψ (f ) (n0 , nt ) α0 Γα0 β0 ψ (f ) (n0 , nt ) β0 ,
a0

(6.34)

a0

where Γ is an element of the Cliﬀord algebra.
However, a more realistic wave function can be obtained by choosing a less
trivial function F . In order to be able to work with only one set of 12 sources
one usually uses factorizable functions (α0 , β0 , a0 are summed)
(n ,α0 ,a0 )

F (n0 ; n1 , n2 ) α1 α2 = Si 0
a1 a2

(n ,β0 ,a0 )

(n1 ) α1 Γα0 β0 Sk 0
a1

(n2 )∗α2 .
a2

(6.35)

6.2 Strategy of the calculation

137

We have introduced the subscripts i and k to indicate that the source functions
for ψ and ψ may diﬀer. Using the form (6.35) one can rewrite (6.33) in terms
of so-called smeared fermions. To indicate the type of source we mark the
smeared fermions with a lower index i or k, respectively:


(f  )
ψk (n0 , nt ) α0 ≡
Sk (n0 ,α0 ,a0 ) (n2 )∗α2 ψ (f ) (n2 , nt ) α2 ,
a0

(f )

ψ i (n0 , nt ) α0 ≡
a0

a2

a2

n2



Si (n0 ,α0 ,a0 ) (n1 ) α1 ψ (f ) (n1 , nt ) α1 .
a1

n1

(6.36)

a1

This form makes it obvious that the smeared ﬁeld at n0 is combined from the
original ﬁelds at positions ni . The meson operator in terms of the smeared
fermions becomes simply (this is (6.34), but now for smeared ﬁelds):
(f  )

(f )

OM (n0 ) = ψ i (n0 , nt ) α0 Γα0 β0 ψk
a0

(n0 , nt ) β0 .

(6.37)

a0

Introducing these smearing functions for sources Si , located at m0 , and sinks
Sk , located at n0 , leads to the smeared quark propagator
*
+
(f )
(f )
(6.38)
Gki (n0 |m0 ) β0 α0 ≡ ψk (n0 ) β0 ψ i (m0 ) α0
a0 F
b0 a0
b0
,

(m0 ,α0 ,a0 )
(n0 ,β0 ,b0 )
∗ (f )
(f )
=
Sk
(n) β ψ (n) β Si
(m) α ψ (m) α
b

m,n

=



Sk

(n0 ,β0 ,b0 )

n,m

(n)∗β
b



Df−1



a

b

a

F

(m ,α ,a )
(n|m) βα Si 0 0 0 (m) α .
a
ba

In the construction of the meson and baryon correlators, as discussed in
Sect. 6.1, one now simply replaces the original quark propagator Df−1 by the
smeared propagator Gki . In an actual numerical calculation one computes the
propagator from a smeared source Si to a point-like sink according to

(m ,α ,a )
D−1 (n|m) βα Si 0 0 0 (m) α .
(6.39)
m,α,a

ba

a

The smearing of the sink can then be done in the subsequent construction of
the hadron propagators by applying the smearing operator presented in the
next subsection.
6.2.3 Extended sources
For smearing functions S that are not gauge-covariant, one has to ﬁx the gauge
in the time slice using the methods from Sect. 3.2. Various source shapes have
been used in that context. The extreme among those is a source constant in a
time slice, the so-called wall-source. Attractive are Gaussian shapes motivated
by intuition. The ﬁnal incentive always is the optimization of the signal.

138

6 Hadron spectroscopy

A gauge-covariant source, with a shape similar to a Gaussian, is obtained
by Jacobi smearing [3, 4]. One acts with a smearing operator M on the point
source S0 of (6.30) in time slice nt to obtain the smeared source:
(n ,α0 ,a0 )

S (n0 ,α0 ,a0 ) = M S0 0

,

M=

N


κn H n .

(6.40)

n=0

The operator H is essentially the spatial part of the Wilson term (5.50) without the constant piece (nt is ﬁxed to the time slice of the source),
H(n, m) =

3 



Uj (n, nt ) δ(n + ĵ, m) + Uj (n − ĵ, nt )† δ(n − ĵ, m) .

j=1

(6.41)
Note that H and therefore also M are hermitian and act only on the color
indices, but are trivial in Dirac space. The operation connects diﬀerent sites
of the time slice to the central site with gauge transporters. Jacobi smearing
has two free parameters: the number of smearing steps N and the positive real
parameter κ. These two parameters can be used to adjust the proﬁle (width)
of the source. Also combining quark sources of diﬀerent widths has proved to
be eﬃcient for optimizing the hadron propagation signals (cf. Sect. 6.3.3).
6.2.4 Calculation of the quark propagator
Having prepared our sources S, we need to compute the propagator D−1 acting on the source according to (6.39), i.e., we need G = D−1 S. Put diﬀerently,
one has to solve the system of equations
DG = S ,

(6.42)

where D is the Dirac matrix operator, S the source vector, and G the unknown
propagator vector. This can be done using iterative methods. In order to get
acquainted with that approach let us brieﬂy discuss the grandmother of those
algorithms: As shown in the discussion of the hopping expansion (compare
(5.57)), after rescaling the fermions we may split D into a constant part and
a nontrivial term,
D ≡1−Q.
(6.43)
Then a series expansion
G = (1 − Q)−1 S = (1 + Q + Q2 + Q3 + . . .) S

(6.44)

leads to the iteration prescription
G(0) = S ,

G(i+1) = S + Q G(i) .

(6.45)

This is the simple Jacobi iteration which converges when the largest eigenvalue of Q is smaller than 1 in magnitude. In each iteration step one only has

6.2 Strategy of the calculation

139

to apply the matrix Q to the vector G(i) and add S until convergence is obtained. Relaxation methods like the Gauss–Seidel method interpolate between
subsequent steps and may improve convergence. Both methods belong to the
class of stationary methods which solve for each of the variables locally, by
keeping the current values of the other variables ﬁxed. Other variants derived from the Gauss–Seidel method, but converging an order of magnitude
faster, are the SOR (successive overrelaxation) and SSOR (symmetric SOR)
methods, which introduce extrapolation parameters [5].
Most calculations, however, use a variant of the conjugate gradient (CG)
method [5, 6]. This is a so-called non-stationary method and the concept
is to iteratively minimize a quadratic functional, equivalent to ﬁnding the
solution of the system of equations. For real symmetric, positive deﬁnite N ×N
matrices A the function
Q(x) =

1 T
x A x − xT b
2

(6.46)

is (up to a constant) a positive deﬁnite quadratic form assuming its minimum
at x∗ , where its gradient vanishes,
∂Q(x)|x∗ = A x∗ − b = 0 .

(6.47)

Thus x∗ is the solution of the system Ax = b. The CG method works by
iteratively constructing search direction vectors p(i) and iterates x(i) such
that in each step Q(x(i) + αi p(i) ) is minimized as a function of the real
parameter αi , leading to the next iterate x(i+1) = x(i) + αi p(i) . The vectors
p(i) are orthogonal to A p(i−1) (and all previous A p(j) ) sequentially build up a
vector space K(i) = span(p(0) , . . . , p(i) ), which is called a Krylov subspace. All
variants of the CG method are based on such an implicit construction of an
orthogonal basis for the Krylov subspace. Methods like the Lanczos algorithm
for ﬁnding the eigensystem of a matrix work with this concept as well and the
corresponding iteration may be related to the CG iteration [5].
The iterates x(i) minimize Q in the spaces K(i) and approach the solution
vector x∗ in at most N steps. However, often much fewer steps give suﬃciently
accurate results. This may be checked by computing the norm A x(i) −b, and
the process is terminated once the norm is smaller than the requested accuracy
ε. Only scalar products between vectors and matrix–vector multiplications
have to be computed and only vectors have to be kept in storage. Both are
important advantages for the large, but often sparse, matrices associated with
the Dirac operators.
In its original version CG works only for positive deﬁnite symmetric matrices A. However, for non-symmetric matrices the residual vectors cannot be
made orthogonal within these limitations. The Dirac operator D is not positive deﬁnite hermitian; it has complex eigenvalues. For non-symmetric, general
matrices a variant called Bi-Conjugate Gradient (Bi-CGR) does the job. There
two sequences of search directions and residual vectors are generated, which

140

6 Hadron spectroscopy

Table 6.2. Pseudocode [5] for the Bi-CGStab algorithm with preconditioning matrix
M . For no preconditioning set M = 1 and simplify the code
r (0) = b − A x(0)
r̃ = r (0) (for example)
for i = 1, 2 . . . iterate :
ρi−1 = r̃ † · r (i−1)
if ρi−1 equals 0, the method fails.
if i = 1 then
p(1) = r (0)
else
βi−1 = αi−1 ρi−1 / (ω
i−1 ρi−2 )
p(i) = r (i−1) + βi−1

end if
solve M p̂ = p(i)
v (i) = A p̂ 

αi = ρi−1 / r̃ † · v (i)

p(i−1) − ωi−1 v (i−1)





s = r (i−1) − αi v (i)
if the norm of s is small enough, set x(i) = x(i−1) + αi p̂ and stop.
solve M ŝ = s
t = A ŝ


ωi = t† · s/ t† · t
r (i) = s − ωi t
x(i) = x(i−1) + αi p̂ + ωi ŝ
repeat until convergence . . .

obey a bi-orthogonality relation. Even better, improving convergence properties, the so-called Bi-CGR Stabilized (Bi-CGStab) method [7] and another
improvement, Bi-CGStab(2) by [8], have been introduced. For details we refer
to the original papers and to [5].
We remark that one could utilize D−1 = D† (D D† )−1 and apply an algorithm for hermitian matrices to compute (D D† )−1 . Furthermore, for γ5 hermitian Dirac operators one could also invert the hermitian matrix Dγ5
and use D−1 = γ5 (Dγ5 )−1 . In practice, however, it turned out that the strategy of using an algorithm for hermitian matrices does not necessarily lead to
faster convergence.
Here we discuss only the Bi-CGStab algorithm along the lines of [5]. In order to solve the matrix equation (6.47) for the unknown vector x∗ , one starts
with a guessed vector x(0) . The pseudo-code for the iteration with preconditioning (see below) then may be written as in Table 6.2. For the application
of Bi-CGStab to our problem (6.42), one sets A = D, b = S, and obtains the
desired propagator vector G = D−1 S as G = limi→∞ x(i) .
We remark that r̃ remains constant and one may also choose other r̃,
as long as ρ0 = 0. For repeating the iteration one needs ωi = 0 (the

6.2 Strategy of the calculation

141

Bi-CGStab(2) algorithm helps in this respect [8]). One stops the iterations
as soon as r(i)† · r(i) < ε for some requested accuracy ε. The algorithm needs
two matrix–vector multiplications with A, two inversions of the preconditioner
M , and four inner products for each iteration step.
For the simple CG algorithm convergence is guaranteed for positive deﬁnite
symmetric matrices, at least after N steps for matrices of dimension N , but
usually signiﬁcantly faster. For Bi-CGStab convergence may be faster than
that of other CG methods, but not necessarily, and in some cases it even
breaks down. Other starting values or other methods have to be chosen in
such situations.
So-called preconditioning methods sometimes allow one to accelerate the
convergence, depending on the Dirac operator. A preconditioner is a suitable
matrix M which we use to transform the system to
M −1 A x = M −1 b .

(6.48)

Let us assume that we have a matrix M , which is numerically cheap to invert,
i.e., to solve M ŝ = s for ŝ, and which approximates A in some way. Then
the spectral properties of M −1 A may be more favorable, allowing faster convergence of the iterative solution. This may be true in particular, if the small
eigenvalues of M agree with those of A. For a more complete discussion of
such methods cf. [5, 9].
When inverting the Dirac operators for diﬀerent quark masses, the matrices diﬀer just by a constant in the diagonal. One then can simultaneously
solve the set of equations for a set of quark masses with little extra cost. The
rate of convergence is determined by the convergence for the smallest mass.
Such a multi-mass algorithm has been discussed in [10, 11].
Since the determination of the quark propagators is numerically quite expensive, one often stores these for each gauge conﬁguration sampled and computes various hadron observables from them in the later analysis.

6.2.5 Exceptional conﬁgurations
So far we have not taken into account the Dirac operator matrix D[U ] which
depends on the gauge ﬁeld U . This implies that the properties of D[U ] will
change as one changes U . In particular, certain ﬂuctuations of the gauge ﬁeld,
so-called exceptional conﬁgurations, lead to small eigenvalues of D[U ] which
make the numerical inversion of D[U ] problematic.
To understand this phenomenon in more detail let us consider the eigenvalues of D[U ]. For quarks with bare mass parameter m they are given by
m + λi [U ] ,

(6.49)

where λi [U ] are the eigenvalues of the massless Dirac operator. In general these
are complex numbers, but also real eigenvalues λi [U ] = ri [U ] are possible. If

142

6 Hadron spectroscopy

such a real eigenvalue becomes negative and in magnitude similar to m, then
the Dirac operator has a very small eigenvalue. In this case the numerical
inversion of D[U ] breaks down, and only increasing the quark mass m resolves
the problem. Thus the exceptional conﬁgurations limit the quark masses one
can reach. For example in quenched simulations with Wilson fermions it turns
out that in a typical simulation4 (e.g., for lattice size 323 × 64) the quark mass
has to be chosen large enough such that the pion mass is at least 300 MeV
instead of the physical 135 MeV.
We remark that for chiral fermions, where the Dirac operator obeys the
Ginsparg–Wilson equation, a concept which we discuss in Chap. 7, the real
eigenvalues do not ﬂuctuate and the problem with exceptional conﬁgurations
does not occur; therefore realistic pion masses can be reached. Also introducing a twisted mass term (see Chap. 10) solves the problem with exceptional
conﬁgurations, since it expels the spectrum from a strip along the real axis.
In practical simulations one ﬁnds that the ﬂuctuations of the eigenvalues
are coupled to the ﬂuctuations of the gauge ﬁeld. These ﬂuctuations can be
damped by either using improved gauge ﬁeld actions (see Chap. 9), larger
lattices, or by smoothing techniques which we discuss in the next subsection.
6.2.6 Smoothing of gauge conﬁgurations
When aiming for correlation functions one is mainly interested in the long
distance behavior. On the other hand, typical for gauge theories are violent
short distance ﬂuctuations of the gauge ﬁeld. One can considerably improve
the correlation signal by smoothing or smearing the gauge ﬁeld, either only in
the time slices or even in space and time. This also helps with the exceptional
conﬁgurations discussed in the preceding subsection.
When smoothing or smearing one typically replaces the link variables by
local averages over short paths connecting the link’s endpoints. This is a gauge
covariant procedure and one does not have to ﬁx the gauge. The operators
and propagators are then constructed on the smeared conﬁgurations. As long
as the smearing is local enough, i.e., the smearing operator combines only
a ﬁxed number of links, the long distance correlation signals should not be
aﬀected in the continuum limit.
Smearing algorithms are all averaging products of links along certain paths
connecting the endpoints of a given link. For SU(2) this average is proportional
to a group element, but for SU(3) this is not the case. Therefore one has to
project the average to an SU(3) matrix. We brieﬂy mention here only three
variants of such smearing algorithms.
APE smearing [12]: In that case the average is over the original link Uμ
and over the six perpendicular staples (visualize!) connecting its endpoints,
4

Theoretical arguments show that only for κ < 1/8 one can be sure that there
are no exceptional conﬁgurations.

6.3 Extracting hadron masses

Vμ (n) = (1 − α) Uμ +

143

α 
Cμν (n) ,
6
ν=μ

Cμν (n) = Uν (n) Uμ (n + ν̂) Uν (n + μ̂)†
+ Uν (n − ν̂)† Uμ (n − ν̂) Uν (n − ν̂ + μ̂) ,

(6.50)

where the real parameter α may be adjusted depending on the gauge coupling. The projection
of the sum to SU(3) is usually done by maximizing
!
Re tr X Vμ (n)† for X ∈ SU(3) and using X as new link variable Uμ (n).
HYP smearing [13]: In that approach the average is over paths lying
within the hypercubes containing the link variable. Again the sum has to be
projected to SU(3).
Stout smearing [14]: This method uses a particular way of projection,
deﬁning the new link after a smearing step by
Uμ (n) = ei Qμ (n) Uμ (n) .
Qμ (n) is a traceless, hermitian matrix constructed from staples,


!
i
1
†
†
Qμ (n) =
Ωμ (n) − Ωμ (n) − tr Ωμ (n) − Ωμ (n)
,
2
3
⎛
⎞

ρμν Cμν (n)⎠ Uμ (n)† .
Ωμ (n) = ⎝

(6.51)

(6.52)

ν=μ

The Cμν are the same as in (6.50) and the real weight factors ρμν are tunable
parameters. Common choices are taking them constant, ρμν = ρ, or smearing
only the spatial links: ρμ4 = ρ4μ = 0, ρnm = ρ. The new links have gauge
transformation properties like the original ones. This approach of getting an
SU(3) element from a sum of matrices may be used for other combinations
of paths too, of course. The advantage of stout smearing is that Uμ (n) is
diﬀerentiable with respect to the link variables. This is a prime beneﬁt in
applications like the hybrid Monte Carlo method for dynamical fermions discussed in Chap. 8.
Such link smearing methods lead to what is often called a fat link for
obvious reasons. There is a variety of other such suggestions, among them the
FLIC link [15] or diﬀerentiable variants of the HYP smearing [16, 17].
All such smearing steps can be iterated. However, the smearing then aﬀects
not just neighboring variables but extends over increasingly larger distances.
Eventually the asymptotic behavior of the propagators will be aﬀected rendering such results problematic. Anyway, most of the positive eﬀect of smearing
is achieved already after the ﬁrst smearing step(s).

6.3 Extracting hadron masses
Once the quark propagators are computed as described in the last section,
they can be combined to the hadron correlators discussed in Sect. 6.1. From

144

6 Hadron spectroscopy

these correlators one can extract the corresponding hadron masses and in this
section we present the techniques necessary for this step.
In spectroscopy calculations we analyze hadron correlators of the form
(6.1). In these formulas energies E, masses m, and momenta p always come
with a factor of the lattice constant a, making the products aE, am, and
ap dimensionless. It is convenient to drop the factor of the lattice constant and use so-called lattice units. In lattice units (6.1) assumes the form
(6.53) below. For going back to physical units, an energy E has to be replaced by aE, and equivalently for masses and momenta (see Sect. 6.4.2).
Unless stated otherwise, from now on we use lattice units for masses and
energies.
6.3.1 Eﬀective mass curves
In the analysis of the mass spectrum one studies the correlation function of
 with the quantum numbers of a particular hadron or set of
an operator O
hadrons. However, these operators usually do not create eigenstates of the
Hamiltonian. They have contributions from several eigenstates and the correlation function is the spectral sum (1.21), discussed in Chap. 1. If the sink
operator is projected to zero momentum (by summation over the respective
time slices) we ﬁnd
(
) 
 nt ) O(0, 0) =

 † |0 e−nt Ek .
0|O|kk|
O
(6.53)
C(nt ) ≡ O(0,
k

For ﬁnite lattice size the values Ek are discrete. If the operators couple to single
particle intermediate states, the masses mk of those particles will correspond
to the low-lying energy values, i.e., Ek = mk . If the operators couple to two- or
more-particle intermediate states, the energy values Ek are related to masses
and relative momenta of the involved particles.
Due to the exponential form of the terms in the sum (6.53), the relative
contribution of higher lying energy states varies with nt . Only for large nt the
lowest energy state dominates. For smaller nt the mixing with other states
blurs the picture and the sum (6.53) has many relevant contributions,
C(nt ) = A0 e−nt E0 + A1 e−nt E1 . . . .

(6.54)

In Sect. 6.3.3 we will discuss methods to analyze the case when more than one
energy level has to be determined. For the moment let us consider the simplest
situation where one is interested only in the lowest energy E0 corresponding
to the ground state.
The left-hand side plot of Fig. 6.3 shows an example for the correlation
function of a mesonic operator with the quantum numbers of the pion in a
sample calculation. The linear regions in the log-plot correspond to the range
of nt -values where a single exponential behavior ∼ exp(−nt E0 ) dominates.

6.3 Extracting hadron masses
1.2

m = 0.02
m = 0.05
m = 0.10
m = 0.20

100
C(nt)

145

m = 0.02
m = 0.05
m = 0.10
m = 0.20

1.0
meff
0.8

10–2

0.6
0.4

10–4

0.2
10–6

0

5

10

15
nt

20

25

30

0.0

0

5

10

15
nt

20

25

30

Fig. 6.3. Result of a Monte Carlo simulation on a 163 × 32 lattice at lattice spacing
a ≈ 0.15 fm. L.h.s.: log-plot for the pion correlation function; r.h.s.: eﬀective mass
plot (in lattice units). The diﬀerent sets correspond to diﬀerent values of the quark
mass in lattice units. The points are connected to guide the eye

For mesons propagation in nt and (NT − nt ) is identical up to a possible relative minus sign and, when only the ground state is considered, the correlator
shows (depending on source and sink interpolators) a cosh- or sinh-dependence
on nt :
/
2 A0 e−NT E0 /2 cosh ((NT /2 − nt )E0 )
−nt E0
−(NT −nt ) E0
.
A0 e
± A0 e
=
2 A0 e−NT E0 /2 sinh ((NT /2 − nt )E0 )
(6.55)
In order to analyze in which range of nt the contribution of the sub-leading
exponentials in (6.54) can be neglected, one deﬁnes an eﬀective mass as


meﬀ nt + 12 = ln

C(nt )
.
C(nt + 1)

(6.56)

Once the correlator C(nt ) is dominated by the ground state energy, meﬀ becomes constant and forms an eﬀective mass plateau at meﬀ = E0 .
If one wants to respect periodicity in nt according to (6.55), one sets
C(nt )
cosh (meﬀ (nt − NT /2))
=
,
C(nt + 1)
cosh (meﬀ (nt + 1 − NT /2))

(6.57)

(and equivalently for the case of sinh) and solves for meﬀ at each nt . This
was done in the right-hand side plot in Fig. 6.3. Depending on the mass, such
modiﬁcations due to periodicity eﬀects may not be necessary if one stays away
from the region nt  NT /2.
In the right-hand side plot of Fig. 6.3 the eﬀective mass plateaus are well
pronounced for 4 < nt < 28. In this range the contribution of excited states
can be neglected and a two-parameter ﬁt to the simple form A0 exp(−nt E0 )

146

6 Hadron spectroscopy

can be performed. If the correlator is symmetric, as in our example, then one
ﬁts to A0 cosh((nt − NT /2) E0 ).
A generalization of eﬀective mass techniques is combining correlation function values from diﬀerent time slices subtracting the leading exponential decay.
This may be extended to a tool for extraction excited hadron masses [18].
We stress that the symmetry of correlators, i.e., equal propagation in nt
and NT − nt up to a sign, is not a general feature. In particular, after projection to deﬁnite parity (see (6.16)) a baryon propagates in nt , while its parity
partner propagates in NT − nt . Since the two masses are diﬀerent, the propagator is not symmetric, and instead of cosh or sinh, the simple exponential
form has to be used for eﬀective masses and the ﬁt function.
6.3.2 Fitting the correlators
Although plotting meﬀ gives a ﬁrst estimate of the ground state mass, a correlated ﬁt in a range of nt values should be performed. For the correlated
analysis one ﬁts the data in a range nmin ≤ nt , nt ≤ nmax by minimizing
χ2 =

n
max

(C(nt ) − f (nt )) w(nt , nt ) (C(nt ) − f (nt )) ,

(6.58)

nt ,nt =nmin

with regard to the parameters A0 , E0 of the hypothesis function
f (nt ) = A0 e−E0 nt or f (nt ) = A0 cosh ((nt − NT /2) E0 ) (or sinh) .
(6.59)
The weight w ideally should be the inverse of the exact covariance matrix,
i.e., w(nt , nt ) = Cov−1 (nt , nt ). In actual Monte Carlo runs one only knows an
estimator, i.e., the measured covariance matrix of the data,
CovN (nt , nt ) =

1
 (C(nt ) − C(nt )N ) (C(nt ) − C(nt )N ) N , (6.60)
N −1

where . . .N denotes the statistical average over N gauge conﬁgurations. In

(6.58) one thus uses w(nt , nt ) = Cov−1
N (nt , nt ).
However, this estimator is often too badly determined and due to statistical
ﬂuctuations there may be accidental small eigenvalues destabilizing the ﬁt. In
such a case often either some smooth approximation or just the diagonal part
of the covariance matrix (neglecting the correlation between diﬀerent data
points) are used. The latter gives rise to w(nt , nt ) = δnt ,nt /σ(nt )2 and the
χ2 -functional of (6.58) reduces to the form familiar from uncorrelated ﬁts.
For a critical account of correlated ﬁts, see [19].
One method to determine the ﬁt range [nmin , nmax ] in (6.58) is the analysis
of eﬀective mass plateaus discussed above. Another criterion is to require that
the χ2 per degree of freedom of the ﬁt does not change by more than O(1)
when the region is extended. Although a generally valid way to determine
the ﬁt interval is desirable, often – in particular for data with only moderate

6.3 Extracting hadron masses

147

statistics – it is aﬀected by individual prejudice. Any such decision involves
some arbitrariness and should be checked by visual inspection of the ﬁts.
A simple method to estimate the statistical error of the ﬁt result for the
mass is to use the statistical bootstrap or jackknife methods. One repeats the
analysis for large subsets of the data and determines the ﬁnal error of the
mass a posteriori, as discussed in Chap. 4.
6.3.3 The calculation of excited states
In particular at smaller time distances one observes the contribution of states
with energies higher than that of the ground state (see the right-hand side
plot of Fig. 6.3). Obviously it is desirable to get an estimate of these energy
levels corresponding to excited states. At the same time, disentangling ground
states from higher states provides cleaner signals for both.
A direct ﬁt of the correlation function to a hypothesis function f (nt ) which
is a sum of K exponentials,
f (nt ) =

K


ck e−nt Ek ,

(6.61)

k=1

would formally work, if the number of parameters were smaller than the number of data points and if the data C(nt ) were exact. In reality the data result
from Monte Carlo simulations and do have errors. It can be easily demonstrated that already a sum of three exponentials may lead to unreliable results in such ﬁts. Several alternative approaches have been discussed in the
literature.
Bayesian analysis (conditionally biased ﬁts): In order to stabilize
the ﬁt to a hypothesis function of the type (6.61), one does not use the χ2
functional (6.58), but instead one minimizes
F = χ2 + λ φ ,

(6.62)

where φ is some stabilizing function of the ﬁt parameters and λ a positive real
multiplier. This technique is well known for so-called ill-posed problems like
analytic continuation of functions given only by data points [20].
In [21] it has been proposed to use as the stabilizing function
φ=

K 


k )2 + bk (ck − 
ak (Ek − E
ck )2


,

(6.63)

k=1

k and 
where E
ck are prejudices for the expected energy values and coeﬃcients. Adjusting the parameters ak and bk determines the relative weight for
the corresponding bias. The ﬁt is thus stabilized, even if the number of ﬁt
parameters exceeds the number of data, leading to unique results depending

148

6 Hadron spectroscopy

on the multiplier λ, which deﬁnes the “amount of prejudice”. One tries to ﬁnd
regions for the resulting ﬁt parameters that depend only weakly on λ.
One technique based on such ideas [22] has been to start with simple oneexponential ﬁts at large-nt values, then continue with two-exponential ﬁts
including the result of the earlier ﬁt as a bias along the lines discussed. Experience shows that one usually needs good statistics (small statistical errors of
the data) in order to successfully employ that method.
Maximum entropy method: For this approach one writes the correlation function as the Laplace transform of a spectral density,
 ∞
dE ρ(E) e−nt E .
(6.64)
C(nt ) =
0

In the continuum the resulting spectral density ρ(E) should exhibit peaks
near the energy values dominating the correlation function. When computing
ρ(E) from lattice data, one discretizes the energy in small steps, En = n ΔE,
and uses the values ρ(En ) of the density at the discrete energies En as ﬁt
parameters. The technical challenge is to recover the spectral density from
the (few) values of C(nt ) by minimizing a suitable distance functional (6.62).
Various approaches to deﬁne the stabilizing functional φ have been used.
In the maximum entropy method the functional φ in (6.62) is chosen based
on probabilistic arguments. We normalize the spectral density according to
 ∞
dE ρ(E) ≡ 1 .
(6.65)
C(0) =
0

Then ρ(E) should be distributed such that each “quantum” has the same a
priori chance to contribute to the energy value E. This leads to the stabilizer
 ∞
φ[ρ] =
dE ρ(E) ln (ρ(E)) .
(6.66)
0

Minimizing the joint probability leads to a smooth solution. A drawback is
that in this method the spectral density has to be positive. Also, the functional
is non-linear and dedicated numerical methods have to be used to solve the
minimization problem.
This approach is heavily used in statistical physics. It also has been applied
to nucleon propagators [23, 24]. From experience with statistical physics it
is expected, however, that one needs data for many values of nt and with
very small errors for a reliable result. Sample calculations show signiﬁcant
ambiguities when one tries to extract more energy levels from moderately
precise correlation data.
Variational analysis: The situation concerning excited states can be
improved by considering not only a single correlator, but by computing a
matrix of cross correlators
(
)

i (0, nt ) Oj (0, 0) =
i |kk|O
 † |0 e−nt Ek , (6.67)
0|O
Cij (nt ) ≡ O
j
k

6.3 Extracting hadron masses

149

for a set of N basis interpolators Oi , i = 1, . . . , N , all with the quantum
numbers of the state one is interested in. Diﬀerent interpolators can, e.g., be
constructed by using diﬀerent Dirac structures as discussed in Sect. 6.1, or
with quark propagators acting on diﬀerent quark sources.
Utilizing the special form of the spectral decomposition on the right-hand
side of (6.67) it has been shown [25–27] that diagonalizing the cross-correlation
matrix C(nt ) allows to disentangle the physical states to some amount.
Indeed the eigenvalues λ(k) (nt ) of the correlation matrix can be shown to
behave as


(6.68)
λ(k) (nt ) ∝ e−nt Ek 1 + O(e−nt ΔEk ) ,
where ΔEk is the distance of Ek to nearby energy levels. Even better results
can be obtained when using the generalized eigenvalue equation
C(nt ) v = λ(nt ) C(n0 ) v ,

(6.69)

where the eigenvalues behave again as in (6.68), but the amplitude of the
correction term is typically smaller. The generalized eigenvalue problem (6.69)
may be rewritten as
Q(n0 )−1 C(nt ) Q† (n0 )−1 u = λ(nt ) u with Q(n0 ) Q† (n0 ) = C(n0 ) .

(6.70)

Numerically this form is expected to be more stable than diagonalizing
C(n0 )−1 C(nt ), which is another way of rewriting the generalized eigenvalue
problem as a regular eigenvalue problem.
In the generalized eigenvalue problem the normalization at some time slice
n0 < nt ought to improve the signal by suppressing the contributions from
higher excited states. Indeed that eﬀect can be observed in sample calculations
using model data: Both approaches, the straightforward diagonalization, as
well as the generalized eigenvalue problem, give the correct answers asymptotically, but the generalized eigenvalue approach does so already at smaller
distances nt .
The method improves when the number of basis interpolators is increased.
These should be independent and have good overlap with the eigenstates of
the problem. On the other hand, in realistic calculations, including more interpolators enhances the statistical noise and thus aﬀects the diagonalization.
It always pays oﬀ to choose lattice operators which are close to the expected
physical content of the eigenstates.
The eigenvectors of the problem give the overlap of the eigenstates, supposedly the states close to the physical states, with the basis interpolators
used in the correlation matrix (6.67). Thus, one may derive information
on the wave function of the physical modes. In [28–30] lattice operators
have been obtained by combining Jacobi smeared quark sources of diﬀerent widths thus allowing for nodes in the spatial wave function. A diﬀerent
approach is followed in [31, 32] where extended lattice interpolators are constructed using irreducible representations of the symmetry group of a cubic
lattice.

150

6 Hadron spectroscopy

6.4 Finalizing the results for the hadron masses
Now we are at a stage where the hadron masses have been extracted from the
corresponding correlators and are ready for analysis. We discuss the necessary
steps for ﬁnalizing the spectroscopy calculation and illustrate them using data
from quenched calculations.
1.5

1.6

aM

MN/Mρ

1.0
1.4

0.5
N
ρ
π
0.0

0.00

0.05

0.10
a mq

0.15

lattice data
experiment

1.2

0.20

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

(Mπ/Mρ)2

Fig. 6.4. Raw data for hadron masses. The left-hand side plot shows pion, ρ, and
nucleon masses in lattice units as a function of the bare quark mass. The right-hand
side plot is a so-called APE plot where dimensionless ratios are compared to the
experimental number. The data are taken from the quenched calculation [33]

6.4.1 Discussion of some raw data
Following the steps of the last sections we have computed hadron masses in
lattice units, i.e., we have obtained numbers for the dimensionless products
aM . Usually, the hadron masses are evaluated for a range of light quark masses
mq ≡ mu = md . The left-hand side plot in Fig. 6.4 shows such raw data for
pion, ρ, and nucleon masses from a quenched simulation [33].
Converting masses in lattice units to numbers, that can be compared to
experimental data, can be done by considering ratios of masses where the
lattice constant a cancels. The right-hand side plot in Fig. 6.4 shows MN /Mρ ,
the ratio of nucleon to ρ mass, as a function of (Mπ /Mρ )2 , where Mπ is the
pion mass. Such a plot is called APE plot [34]. An alternative is the so-called
Edinburgh plot [35], where one uses Mπ /Mρ on the horizontal axis.
In both, APE and Edinburgh plots, the data for MN /Mρ can be compared
to the physical point, MN /Mρ ≈ 1.209 at Mπ /Mρ ≈ 0.180. Although we
do not perform an extrapolation, it is obvious that the data shown in the
APE plot of Fig. 6.4 clearly extrapolate to the physical point already in the
quenched approximation.

6.4 Finalizing the results for the hadron masses

151

6.4.2 Setting the scale and the quark mass parameters
The results of a lattice calculation are always dimensionless numbers like, e.g.,
mass ratios. In order to compare with the experiment, one has to relate a mass
or length unit to an experimental value. Consequently, the data have to be
converted to physical units such as MeV. In other words, one has to determine
the physical value of the lattice constant a in order to obtain a mass M from
the calculated number for aM . There are two main techniques for this step
called scale setting.
Setting the scale with the Sommer parameter: For this approach
one uses the Sommer parameter to determine the lattice constant a from the
static potential as discussed in Sect. 3.5. The result has the form a = x fm,
where x is a dimensionless number.
From our hadron correlators we have computed the dimensionless number
X = a M for some hadron mass M . Consequently the physical mass M = X/a
is given in inverse fm. This mass unit is a consequence of using natural units
 = 1, c = 1. For converting this result to MeV one uses
1 =  c = 197.327 MeV fm

⇒

1 fm−1 = 197.327 MeV .

(6.71)

For the hadron mass in MeV we then obtain
M=

X
X
X
=
fm−1 =
197.327 MeV .
a
x
x

(6.72)

Setting the scale with a hadron mass: In this approach one uses
one of the hadron masses M0 for setting the scale. Popular candidates are
the ρ meson or the nucleon. For that hadron, e.g., the ρ-meson, the mass
in lattice units, aM0 (mq ), has to be known at several values of the bare
quark mass mq . One then extrapolates the data to the value m∗q of the mass
parameter, where the dimensionless pion to ρ mass ratio assumes its physical
value, Mπ (m∗q )/Mρ (m∗q ) = Mπexp /Mρexp = 0.180. Alternatively one may also
extrapolate aM0 (mq ) to the chiral limit, i.e., to mq = 0. This is only an
approximation for the true physical point, but on the other hand this choice
avoids the statistical error due to the measured pion to ρ mass ratio. For both
extrapolations the result is a number X = aM0 (m∗q ) (or X = aM0 (0)), and we
identify M0 (m∗q ) ≡ M0exp (or M0 (0) ≡ M0exp ), where M0exp is the experimental
mass of our hadron in MeV. One obtains the lattice constant in inverse MeV:
a = X/M0exp . This scale a can be directly used to obtain other masses M in
MeV from the values aM in lattice units.
For simulations with three quark ﬂavors, in addition to the scale a, also the
light quark mass mq = mu = md and the strange quark mass ms have to be
determined. For the light quark mass one either identiﬁes the physical point
by setting mq = m∗q , with m∗q determined as discussed above, or alternatively
one assumes that the light u and d quarks are massless. For setting the strange
quark mass, a similar strategy is applied: One uses a hadron containing the
strange quark, typically the K ± pseudoscalar meson, the vector meson φ, or

152

6 Hadron spectroscopy

baryons like Σ or Ω. The K ± has quark content u, s and thus its mass is
a function of the u and s quark masses, MK ± (mq , ms ) with mq = mu . In a
ﬁrst step the data are extrapolated either to the chiral limit, mq = 0, or to
mq = m∗q . This gives the K ± mass MK ± (ms ) at diﬀerent values of the strange
quark mass (the scale is set with one of the methods discussed above). This
is done for several values of ms and the data for MK ± (ms ) are interpolated.
The value m∗s , where the interpolated data coincide with the experimental
exp
value, MK ± (m∗s ) = MK
± = 494 MeV, gives the bare strange quark mass
parameter ms = m∗s . When using the φ, the situation is even simpler, since
φ is predominantly a strange–antistrange state and no chiral extrapolation is
needed.
6.4.3 Various extrapolations
Analyzing lattice data one faces the notorious, three-fold group of problems:
•
•
•

Finite size eﬀects and inﬁnite volume limit V → ∞.
Scaling in the continuum limit a → 0.
Chiral extrapolation m → 0.

Finite size: All numerical lattice results are obtained in ﬁnite volumes.
At ﬁxed other parameters one therefore has to study the dependence on the
lattice size and, if possible, extrapolate to inﬁnite spatial volume. For the
extrapolation one may either use a naive parameterization, e.g., in powers of
1/L for spatial extent L, or, if possible, a model based on theory.
Actually, like in the analysis of the spin models of statistical physics, ﬁnite
size eﬀects may even be useful to learn about inﬁnite volume results. An
example is chiral perturbation theory which provides a systematic expansion
with the inﬁnite volume quantities appearing as parameters [36, 37]. We apply
such formulas in the next chapter when we discuss a lattice calculation of the
chiral condensate on ﬁnite lattices.
For most spectroscopy studies one uses N 3 × NT lattices which are much
larger in the time direction than in the spatial directions and L = a N . Indeed, neglecting the ﬁnite time extent (and thus ﬁnite temperature eﬀects)
the leading ﬁnite size eﬀects are due to the spatial volume. Eﬀects from interaction around the spatial torus lead to exponential corrections to the mass
of O (exp(−α L)) (cf. [38, 39] and the discussion in Chap. 11). The leading contribution comes from the smallest mass hadron, the pion, and is of
O (exp(−L Mπ )). As a rule of thumb, for L Mπ > 4 ﬁnite size eﬀects from this
mechanism can be ignored.
For small volumes numerical studies of the volume dependence of hadron
masses seem to indicate a 1/Ln behavior, with n ≈ 2−3. This would be
compatible with the intuitive picture that the wave function is squeezed at
too small spatial volume and that the observed shift in energy is in leading
order due to this squeezing eﬀect (cf. [40, 41] and references therein). Most
analyses agree on the observation that ground state hadron masses obtained

6.4 Finalizing the results for the hadron masses

153

for linear lattice sizes larger than 3 fm show no noticeable volume dependence.
For excited states with wave functions of larger extent, the squeezing eﬀect
may be more serious.
Continuum limit and scaling: A measured mass M (physical units)
has a-dependent corrections,
M (a) = Mphys (1 + O (aα )) ,

(6.73)

which may be diﬀerent for diﬀerent lattice actions. Whereas with the Wilson
fermion action a quadratic contribution to the mass was identiﬁed [42], one
ﬁnds that improving the fermion action reduces this dependence [33].
Eventually we want to obtain results for continuous space–time. This corresponds to the limit a → 0, or, equivalently, β → ∞. However, decreasing
the lattice spacing for a ﬁxed number of lattice points shrinks the physical
volume. Thus, as we decrease a (increase β), we have to increase the number
of lattice points, N 3 × NT , which in turn drives up the numerical cost of the
simulation. Typical simulations try to aﬀord three or four values of a and
perform an extrapolation to a = 0.
Chiral extrapolation: Often numerical results are obtained for unphysically large quark masses. Eventually we want to approach the small quark
masses corresponding to the physical pion. From a conceptual point of view
one even might be interested in the massless case, the chiral limit m → 0.
Massless 2-ﬂavor QCD (i.e., assuming vanishing mu and md ) is an interesting
and nontrivial, one-parameter theory, where hadron masses are expected to be
close to their experimental values. One could even call this a zero-parameter
theory, since the gauge coupling is only used to ﬁx the scale. Unfortunately
this limit is hard to achieve for several reasons. Toward smaller quark masses
a Pandora’s box of problems opens up.
For fermion actions that do not preserve chiral symmetry (or do not introduce a regulator like the twisted mass action, cf. Chaps. 7 and 10), there
are zero modes occurring even for nonvanishing quark mass, due to the exceptional conﬁgurations discussed in Sect. 6.2.5. This limits the smallest pion
masses that can be reached.
Another class of problems at small mq turns up when using the quenched
approximation. Omitting the fermion determinant has several eﬀects:
•
•
•
•

The absence of the fermion determinant alters the physics by omitting
sea quark loops (compare Fig. 6.2). Thus, hadrons cannot decay in the
quenched approximation.
The contribution of the anomaly (see next chapter) is removed and the
η  -meson becomes light – an additional Goldstone mode appears.
States with negative coeﬃcients in their correlation function appear, socalled ghosts. The quenched η  combined with a hadron provides an example for such a state [43–45], cf. the hairpin diagrams in Fig. 6.2.
Small eigenvalues of the Dirac operator are not suppressed by the determinant (which is the product of all eigenvalues). Consequently, ﬂuctuations
leading to exceptional conﬁgurations may occur more often.

154

6 Hadron spectroscopy
1.8
1.6
Ξ

m (GeV)

1.4
Λ

φ

1.2
K*

Ω

Σ

Ξ*
Σ*

N

1.0

Δ

0.8

K input
φ input
experiment

0.6

K

0.4

Fig. 6.5. Quenched light hadron spectrum compared with experiments; statistical
and systematic errors are indicated. The plot is from a high statistics simulation
of the CP–PACS collaboration using Wilson valence quarks [42]. (Reprinted ﬁgure
with permission from S. Aoki et al., Phys. Rev. D 67, 034503 (2003). Copyright
(2003) by the American Physical Society)

For extrapolations in the quark mass, chiral perturbation theory provides
the suitable conceptional background (for introductory accounts, see [46–49]).
Chiral perturbation theory is an expansion in the pion mass around the chiral
limit taking into account the symmetries of QCD. The resulting extrapolation
formulas are typically expressed in terms of the pion mass, and as an example
we show the result for the extrapolation of the nucleon [50, 51]


MN = c0 + c2 Mπ2 + c3 Mπ3 + c4 Mπ4 ln(Mπ ) + O Mπ4 ,

(6.74)

where the expansion coeﬃcients ci are related to low energy constants such
as the pion decay constant in the chiral limit.
Chiral perturbation theory can be modiﬁed to take into account quenching
[52–54]. Formulas such as (6.74) obtain corrections which may become singular
in the chiral limit. This is due to the additional Goldstone boson already
addressed.
6.4.4 Some quenched results
High precision determinations of hadron masses involve measurements on several hundred gauge ﬁeld conﬁgurations on lattices with size up to 643 × 112
for quenched Wilson fermions (see e.g. [42, 55]; simulations with other formulations will be addressed in later chapters). The lattice spacing in these simulations was as small as 0.05 fm at a linear physical lattice size of O(3.2 fm).

References

155

To illustrate what has been achieved in quenched lattice spectroscopy, in
Fig. 6.5 we show the results of a high statistics study from the CP–PACS
collaboration [42]. The mass values have been obtained after extrapolation to
inﬁnite volume, vanishing lattice spacing and the chiral limit. Results from
setting the strange quark mass with either K or φ are compared. Although the
calculation was done in the quenched approximation, a good agreement with
experimental data is found for a large range of hadrons. In Chap. 8 we will
compare Fig. 6.5 to a more recent spectroscopy result with fully dynamical
quarks.

References
1. C. Amsler et al. [Particle Data Group]: Phys. Lett. B 667, 1 (2008) 125
2. D.B. Leinweber et al.: in Lect. Notes Phys. 663, 71. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2005) 129, 130
3. S. Güsken et al.: Phys. Lett. B 227, 266 (1989) 138
4. C. Best et al.: Phys. Rev. D 56, 2743 (1997) 138
5. R. Barrett et al.: Templates for the Solution of Linear Systems: Building Blocks
for Iterative Methods (SIAM, Philadelphia 1994) 139, 140, 141
6. W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery: Numerical
Recipes in C, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York 1999) 139
7. H. A. van der Vorst: SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Comput. 13, 631 (1992) 140
8. M. H. Gutknecht: SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Comput. 14, 1020 (1993) 140, 141
9. I. Montvay and G. Münster: Quantum Fields on a Lattice (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, New York 1994) 141
10. A. Frommer et al.: Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 6, 627 (1995) 141
11. B. Jegerlehner: Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 63, 958 (1998) 141
12. M. Albanese et al.: Phys. Lett. B 192, 163 (1987) 142
13. A. Hasenfratz and F. Knechtli: Phys. Rev. D 64, 034504 (2001) 143
14. C. Morningstar and M. Peardon: Phys. Rev. D 69, 054501 (2004) 143
15. W. Kamleh, D. Adams, D. B. Leinweber, and A. G. Williams: Phys. Rev. D 66,
014501 (2002) 143
16. A. Hasenfratz, R. Hoﬀmann, and S. Schaefer: JHEP 0705, 029 (2007) 143
17. S. Dürr: Comput. Phys. Commun. 180, 1338 (2009) 143
18. D. Guadagnoli, M. Papinutto, and S. Simula: Phys. Lett. B 604, 74 (2004) 146
19. C. Michael: Phys. Rev. D 49, 2616 (1994) 146
20. S. Ciulli, C. Pomponiu, and I. Sabba-Stefanescu: Phys. Rep. 17, 133 (1975) 147
21. G. P. Lepage et al.: Nucl. Phys. (Proc. Suppl.) 106, 12 (2002) 147
22. Y. Chen et al. (unpublished) arXiv:hep-lat/0405001 (2004) 148
23. M. Asakawa, T. Hatsuda, and Y. Nakahara: Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 46, 459
(2001) 148
24. K. Sasaki, S. Sasaki, T. Hatsuda, and M. Asakawa: Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.)
129, 212 (2004) 148
25. C. Michael: Nucl. Phys. B 259, 58 (1985) 149
26. M. Lüscher and U. Wolﬀ: Nucl. Phys. B 339, 222 (1990) 149
27. B. Blossier et al.: JHEP 0904, 094 (2009) 149
28. T. Burch et al.: Phys. Rev. D 70, 054502 (2004) 149

