Preface

Quantum chromodynamics (QCD) is the fundamental quantum ﬁeld theory
of quarks and gluons. In order to discuss it in a mathematically well-deﬁned
way, the theory has to be regularized. Replacing space–time by a Euclidean
lattice has proven to be an eﬃcient approach which allows for both theoretical understanding and computational analysis. Lattice QCD has become a
standard tool in elementary particle physics.
As the title already says: this book is introductory! The text is intended for
newcomers to the ﬁeld, serving as a starting point. We simply wanted to have a
book which we can put into the hands of an advanced student for a ﬁrst reading
on lattice QCD. This imaginary student brings as a prerequisite knowledge of
higher quantum mechanics, some continuum quantum ﬁeld theory, and basic
facts of elementary particle physics phenomenology.
In view of the wealth of applications in current research the topics presented here are limited and we had to make some painful choices. We discuss
QCD but omit most other lattice ﬁeld theory applications like scalar theories, gauge–Higgs models, or electroweak theory. Although we try to lead the
reader up to present day understanding, we cannot possibly address all ongoing activities, in particular concerning the role of QCD in electroweak theory.
Subjects like glueballs, topological excitations, and approaches like chiral perturbation theory are mentioned only brieﬂy. This allows us to cover the other
topics quite explicitly, including detailed derivations of key equations. The
ﬁeld is rapidly developing. The proceedings of the annual lattice conferences
provide information on newer directions and up-to-date results.
As usual, completing the book took longer than originally planned and
we thank our editor Claus Ascheron for his patience. We are very grateful
to many of our colleagues, who oﬀered to read one or the other piece. In
particular we want to thank Vladimir Braun, Dirk Brömmel, Tommy Burch,
Stefano Capitani, Tom DeGrand, Stephan Dürr, Georg Engel, Christian
Hagen, Leonid Glozman, Meinulf Göckeler, Peter Hasenfratz, Jochen Heitger,
Verena Hermann, Edwin Laermann, Markus Limmer, Pushan Majumdar,
Daniel Mohler, Wolfgang Ortner, Bernd-Jochen Schaefer, Stefan Schaefer,

VIII

Preface

Andreas Schäfer, Erhard Seiler, Stefan Sint, Stefan Solbrig, and Pierre van
Baal.
It would be surprising if there were not mistakes in this text. We therefore
set up a web companion to this book: http://physik.uni-graz.at/qcdlatt/
On that page we document errata and provide further links and information.

Graz,
March 2009

Christof Gattringer
Christian B. Lang

