% SECTION 8: Continuum limit and Symanzik's Improvement program

% -------- PDF page 37 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

37

The open questions are: (i) how to define the “smoothest” solution of the
gauge-fixing algorithm (i.e. defining the fundamental modular domain), (ii)
how to ascertain that a solution is unique (lies within or on the boundary
of the fundamental modular domain), and (iii) how to find it.
The ultimate question is – what is the dependence of the quantities one
wants to calculate on the choice of Gribov copy? A number of studies have
been carried out [46], however the results and their interpretation are not
conclusive. Firstly, it is not known whether the smoothest solution lying
within the fundamental modular domain can be found economically for all
configurations and over the range of gauge coupling being investigated. In
the absence of the smoothest solution it is not clear whether (i) the residual
gauge freedom simply contributes to noise in the correlation function, and
(ii) one should average over a set of Gribov copies for each configuration to
reduce this noise. In my opinion these remain challenging problems that
some of you may wish to pursue.
The problem of Gribov copies and the Faddeev-Papov construction (a
gauge fixing term and the Faddeev-Papov determinant) resurfaces when
one wants to do lattice perturbation theory or when taking the Hamiltonian limit of the path integral via the transfer matrix formalism. This
construction is analogous to that in the continuum [36]. Finally, let me
mention that in a fixed gauge, the lattice theory has only a BRST invariance [27]. While BRST invariance is sufficient to prove that the theory
is renormalizable, the set of operators of any given dimension allowed by
BRST invariance is larger than that with full gauge invariance. In the
analyses of improvement of the action and operators it is this enlarged set
that has to be considered [47].
8. Continuum limit and Symanzik’s Improvement program
The Taylor expansion of the simple Wilson action for the gauge and fermion
degrees of freedom showed the presence of higher dimensional operators.
Since these are suppressed by powers of the lattice spacing, they are irrelevant operators in the language of the renormalization group, i.e. they
vanish at the fixed point at a → 0. Another way of expressing the same
thing is as follows. The lattice theory with a hard cut-off at π/a can be regarded as an effective theory [49]. Integration of momenta from ∞ → π/a
generates effective interactions. Thus, in general, we can write the action
as
XX
an Cin Ani (π/a)
(8.1)
SC = SL (π/a) +
n

i


% -------- PDF page 38 --------
Rajan Gupta

38

where SC (SL ) is the continuum (lattice) action, and the first sum is over all
operators of a given dimension, and the second over all dimensions greater
than four. Similarly, the operators used to probe the physics can be written
as
XX
an Din Oin (π/a)
(8.2)
OC = OL (π/a) +
n

i

where in this case quantum corrections can induce mixing with lower dimension operators also. The coefficients Cin and Din are both functions
of the coupling αs . Parenthetically, one important reason for preserving
gauge, Lorentz, and chiral symmetries at finite a is that they greatly restrict
the set of possible operators of a given dimension.
Now consider the expectation value of a given operator
Z
hOC i = dU OC e−SC
Z
P P m m m
XX

an Din Oin e−SL − m i a Ci Ai
= dU OL +
=

Z

=

Z

+

Z

+

Z

n

i

XX
XX


−SL
am Cim Am
an Din Oin 1 −
dU OL +
i + ... e
n

m

i

i

dU OL e−SL
dU OL
dU


XX m m m
a Ci Ai + . . . e−SL
m

XX
n

i

i

XX

 −SL
am Cim Am
an Din Oin 1 −
. (8.3)
e
i + ...
m

i

Note that the operators Ani , which appear in the action, are summed over

all space-time points. This leads to contact terms in Eq. 8.3 which I shall,
for brevity, ignore as they necessitate a proper definition of the operators
but do not change the conclusions.
The basis for believing that LQCD provides reliable results from simulations at finite a is that the contributions of the lattice artifacts (last
two terms in the last expression) are small, can be estimated, and thus
removed. At this point I will only make a few general statements about
the calculation of expectation values which will be embellished on in later
lectures.
– The contribution of the last two terms in Eq. 8.3 vanishes in the limit a →
0 unless there is mixing with operators of lower dimension. In such cases


% -------- PDF page 39 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

39

the mixing coefficient has to be determined very accurately (necessitating
non-perturbative methods) otherwise the a → 0 limit is divergent.
– Calculations have to be done at values of a at which contributions of
irrelevant terms organized in successive powers in a decrease at least geometrically.
– To achieve continuum results simulations are carried out at a sufficient
number of values of a to allow reliable extrapolation to a = 0. The “fineness” of the lattice spacing a at which to do the calculations and the number
of points needed depends on the size of the corrections and how well we
can determine the functional form to use in the extrapolation.
– To improve the result to any given order in a, one has to improve both
the action and the operators to the same order. Such an approach, based
on removing lattice artifacts organized as a power series expansion in a, is
called the Symanzik improvement program.
Eq. 8.3 shows clearly that there is fair degree of flexibility in constructing
LQCD. We are free to add any irrelevant operator with a sensible strength
and still recover QCD in the continuum limit. The only difference between
various constructions of the action is the approach to the continuum limit.
What we would like to do is improve the action and operators so as to
get continuum results on as coarse lattices as possible. On the other hand
improvement requires adding irrelevant terms to both the action and the
operators. This increases the complexity of the calculations and the simulation time. Thus, the strategy for minimizing discretization errors is a
compromise – optimize between simplicity of the action and operators (defined in terms of the cost of simulation, code implementation, and analyses)
and the reduction of the discretization errors evaluated at some given fixed
value of the lattice spacing, say a ≈ 0.1 fermi. The remaining errors, presumably small, can then be removed by extrapolating the results obtained
from simulations at a few values of a to a = 0.
The number of floating points operations needed in the simulations of
LQCD scale roughly as L6 in the quenched approximation and L10 with dynamical fermions. Current lattice simulations of QCD are done for lattice
spacing a varying in the range 2 GeV ≤ a−1 ≤ 5 GeV . For these parameter values the corrections due to the O(a), O(ma), O(pa), O(a2 ), . . .
terms in the Wilson action are found to be large in many observables. The
importance of improving the lattice formulation (action and operators) is
therefore self-evident, especially for full QCD. Thus, the search for such
actions is a hot topic right now. Before discussing these let me first summarize what one hopes to gain by, and the criteria by which to judge, such
an improvement program.


% -------- PDF page 40 --------
40

Rajan Gupta

1. Improved scaling, i.e. discretization errors are reduced. Consequently
one can work on coarser lattices (smaller L = NS ) for a given accuracy.
Even a factor of 2 reduction in L translates into 210 ≈ 1000 in computer
time!
2. Better restoration of rotational and internal symmetries like chiral,
staggered flavor, etc..
3. The trajectory along which the continuum limit is taken should not
pass close to extraneous phase transitions that are artifacts of the lattice discretization (see Section 15 for a discussion of phase transitions
in the lattice theory). The problem with such transitions is that in
their vicinity the desired continuum scaling behavior can be modified
for certain observables, i.e. the artifact terms in Eq. 8.3 may not have a
geometric convergence in a and may thus be large.
4. The study of topology on the lattice is particularly sensitive to short
distance fluctuations that are artifacts of discretizing the gauge action.
For the Wilson gauge action one finds that the topological charge, calculated using Lüscher’s geometric method [50], jumps from 0 → 1 at a
core radius of the instanton of ρc a ≈ 0.7, whereas the action of such
instantons, Sρc , is significantly less than the classical value S cl = 8π 2 /β.
The entropy factor for such small instantons with S < S cl overwhelms
the Boltzmann suppression, leading to a divergent topological susceptibility in the continuum limit. These short distance artifacts are called
dislocations and it is not a posteriori obvious how to separate the physical from the unphysical when ρ ≈ ρc . It is, therefore, very important
to start with a lattice formulation in which such artifacts are excluded,
and there exist only physical instantons, i.e. those with mean core size
that has the correct scaling behavior with g. One finds that dislocations
are suppressed by improved actions, i.e. improving the gauge action increases Sρc [51] and better definition of the topological charge [52].
5. Lattice perturbation theory becomes increasingly complicated as more
and more irrelevant operators are added to the action. Even though,
with the advent of non-perturbative methods for determining renormalization constants, the reliance on lattice perturbation theory has
decreased, perturbative analyses serve as a valuable guide and check,
so we would like to retain this possibility. What one expects for an
improved action is that the lattice and continuum value of αs , and the
coefficients of the series expansion in αs for a given observable, are much

