% SECTION 6: Formulation of Lattice Gauge Theories

% -------- PDF page 25 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

25

plitudes at threshold can be calculated from the energy shift in a finite
volume, the difference between the 2-particle energy and the sum of the
two particles in isolation [27–30].

6. Formulation of Lattice Gauge Theories

In 1974 Wilson [31] formulated Euclidean gauge theories on the lattice as
a means to study confinement and carry out non-perturbative analysis of
QCD. The numerical implementation of the path integral approach requires
the following five steps.
– Discretization of space-time.
– The transcription of the gauge and fermion degrees of freedom.
– Construction of the action.
– Definition of the measure of integration in the path integral.
– The transcription of the operators used to probe the physics.
Of these, the construction of the action and the operators is the most
intricate. Rather than give you the most recent and improved version of
the lattice action, which will be the subject of Martin Lüscher’s lectures, I
have chosen to follow the original path of discovery.

6.1. Discrete space-time grid
There are a number of possible ways to discretize space-time in 4 Euclidean
dimensions. These include hypercubic, body-centered cubic [32], and random [33] lattices. Of these the simplest is the isotropic hypercubic grid
with spacing a = aS = aT and size NS × NS × NS × NT . Since this grid
is used almost exclusively, it will be the only one discussed in these sets
of lectures. In the case of the random lattice even the free field analysis
becomes difficult [33]. In fact very little exploration of variant grid geometries has actually been done, as there is little expectation of significant
physics gains to offset the additional computational complexity. Recently,
proposals involving anisotropic lattices – a hypercubic grid with different
spacing in space and time directions – have shown promise for reducing the
discretization errors. I shall come back to this development in Section 18.3
when discussing the glueball spectrum.


% -------- PDF page 26 --------
26

Rajan Gupta

6.2. Lattice transcription of field variables ψ(x) and Aµ (x):
The lattice transcription of the matter fields ψ(x) is straightforward. The
quark field is represented by anticommuting Grassmann variables defined
at each site of the lattice. They belong to the fundamental representation
of SU(3). The rules for integration over a pair of fermion variables ψ and
ψ are those standard for Grassmann variables
Z
Z
Z
dψ dψ =
dψ dψ ψ = dψ dψ ψ = 0
Z
Z
dψ ψ = dψ ψ = i
Z
(6.1)
dψ dψ ψ ψ = 1
Since the fermion action is linear in both ψ and ψ, these rules can be used
to integrate over them, and the path integral reduces to one over only the
gauge degrees of freedom. Thus, it turns out that in practice one does not
have to worry about transcribing grassmann variables on the lattice and
implementing the Pauli exclusion principle.
As an aside I would like to mention that the rules of integration for
Grassmann variables are sufficient to do the fermion path integral. Consider hψ(x1 ) . . . ψ(xn )ψ(x1 ) . . . ψ(xn )i. To get a non-zero expectation value
one needs to saturate each site with a ψψ. The sites not covered by
the fields in the operator have to come from the SfV −n term in the expansion exp Sf = 1 + Sf + Sf2 /2 + . . ., where V is the total number of
P
/ + m)ψ(x) is a sum over sites, the number of
sites. Since Sf = x ψ(x)(D
V −n
terms in Sf
poses an exponentially hard combinatorial problem. Furthermore, each term contributing to the connected diagram will contain a
/ term
path-ordered product of gauge links (coming from the discretized D
in Sf . For example, see Eq. 7.5) connecting the sites in the operator, while
the fermionic integration is ±mV −n with the sign given by the number of
times the ψ and ψ are anti-commuted. You should convince yourself that
the fermionic functional integral is the sum over all possible paths touching
each site a maximum of one time. Having enumerated all such paths and
their weights, the gauge functional integral now requires integrating over
each link in each path. This is clearly a very formidable approach, and in
practice rarely considered.
The construction of gauge fields is less intuitive. In the continuum, the
gauge fields Aµ (x) carry 4-vector Lorentz indices, and mediate interactions
between fermions. To transcribe them Wilson noted that in the continuum


% -------- PDF page 27 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

27

a fermion moving from site x to y in presence of a gauge field Aµ (x) picks
up a phase factor given by the path ordered product
Ry
igAµ (x)dxµ
ψ(y) = P e x
ψ(x) .
(6.2)

The eight types of gluons that mediate interactions between quarks are
written in terms of the matrix Aµ (x) ≡ Aaµ (x) · λa /2, where the group
generators λa are normalized to T rλa λb = 2δab . Eq. 6.2 suggested that
gauge fields be associated with links that connect sites on the lattice. So,
with each link Wilson associated a discrete version of the path ordered
product
µ̂

U (x, x + µ̂) ≡ Uµ (x) = eiagAµ (x+ 2 ) ,

(6.3)

where, for concreteness, the average field Aµ is defined at the midpoint of
the link, and U is a 3 × 3 unitary matrix with unit determinant. Also, the
path ordering in eqn. (2.3) specifies that
µ̂

U (x, x − µ̂) ≡ U−µ (x) = e−iagAµ (x− 2 ) = U † (x − µ̂, x) .

(6.4)

6.3. Discrete Symmetries of the lattice theory
The symmetry group of the continuum theory – Poincaré invariance – is
reduced to a discrete group. On a hypercubic lattice rotations by only 90o
are allowed so the continuous rotation group is replaced by the discrete
hypercubic group [34]. Translations have to be by at least one lattice unit,
so the allowed momenta are discrete
2πn
n = 0, 1, . . . L
k =
La
or equivalently
2πn
k = ±
n = 0, 1, . . . L/2 .
La
On the lattice momentum is conserved modulo 2π.
In addition to the local gauge symmetry and Poincaré invariance, the
lattice action is invariant under parity (P), charge conjugation (C) and
time reversal (T ). The behavior of the field variables under these discrete
transformations is given in Table 2.
6.4. Local Gauge Symmetry
The effect of a local gauge transformation V (x) on the variables ψ(x) and
U is defined to be
ψ(x) → V (x)ψ(x)


% -------- PDF page 28 --------
Rajan Gupta

28
Table 2

The behavior of the gauge and fermion degrees of freedom under
the discrete transformations of parity, charge-conjugation, and timereversal. The charge-conjugation matrix C satisﬁes the relation
T = −γ ∗ , and shall be represented by C = γ γ .
Cγµ C −1 = −γµ
4 2
µ
Note that in the Euclidean formulation T is a linear operator.
P
C
T
U4 (x, τ )

U4 (−x, τ )

U4∗ (x, τ )

Ui (x, τ )

U−i (−x, τ )

Ui∗ (x, τ )

ψ(x, τ )

γ4 ψ(−x, τ )

ψ(x, τ )

ψ(−x, τ )γ4

ψ(x) → ψ(x)V † (x)

Uµ (x) → V (x)Uµ (x)V † (x + µ̂)

T

Cψ (x, τ )

−ψT (x, τ )C −1

U−4 (x, −τ )
Ui (x, −τ )

γ4 γ5 ψ(x, −τ )
ψ(x, −τ )γ5 γ4

(6.5)

where V (x) is in the same representation as the U , i.e., it is an SU (3) matrix. With these definitions there are two types of gauge invariant objects
that one can construct on the lattice.
– A string consisting of a path-ordered product of links capped by a fermion
and an antifermion as shown in Fig. 5a. A simple example is
(6.6)
Tr ψ(x) Uµ (x) Uν (x + µ̂) . . . Uρ (y − ρ̂) ψ(y)
where the trace is over the color indices. I will use the word string for a
generalized version; a single spin and color trace as defined in Eq. 6.6, or
a product of elementary strings that are path-ordered and do not have a
spatial discontinuity. On lattices with periodic boundary conditions one
does not need the ψ, ψ caps if the string stretches across the lattice and is
closed by the periodicity. Such strings are called Wilson/Polyakov lines.
– Closed Wilson loops as shown in Fig. 5b. The simplest example is the
plaquette, a 1 × 1 loop,

1×1
Wµν
= Re Tr Uµ (x) Uν (x + µ̂) Uµ† (x + ν̂) Uν† (x) .
(6.7)
Unless otherwise specified, whenever I use the term Wilson loops I will assume that the real part of the trace, Re Tr, has been taken. For SU (N ≥ 3)
the trace of any Wilson loop in the fundamental representation is complex, with the two possible path-orderings giving complex conjugate values.
Thus, taking the trace insures gauge invariance, and taking the real part
is equivalent to averaging the loop and its charge conjugate.
Exercise: Convince yourself that there do not exist any other independent
gauge invariant quantities.


% -------- PDF page 29 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

29

U x(x,y+3)

U y(x,y)

U y(x+4,y)
U x(x,y)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. The two gauge invariant quantities. a) An ordered string of U ′ s capped by a
fermion and an anti-fermion and b) closed Wilson loops.

Exercise: Convince yourself that to preserve gauge invariance one has to
formulate the lattice theory in terms of link variables Uµ rather than the
Aµ directly.
A gauge invariant action, therefore, has to be built out of loops and
strings. However, note that these two basic gauge invariant objects can be
of arbitrary size and shape. Furthermore, they can be taken to lie in any
representation of color SU (3). The only necessary constraint is that it give
the familiar continuum theory in the limit a → 0. The reasons for wanting
to preserve gauge invariance at all a is that otherwise one would have
many more parameters to tune (the zero gluon mass, and the equality of
the quark-gluon, 3-gluon, and 4-gluon couplings are consequences of gauge
symmetry) and there would arise many more operators at any given order in
a (these are irrelevant operators, but at finite a give rise to discretization
errors as discussed in Section 8). In fact, one would like to preserve as
many symmetries of the theory as possible at all values of a and not just
in the continuum limit. It turns out to be relatively simple to maintain
local gauge invariance, however, maintaining chiral symmetry, which has
proven so important in the phenomenology of light quarks, and a one-to-one
relation between Dirac and lattice fermion degrees of freedom has eluded
us. This is discussed in Section 9. Also, discretization de f acto breaks
continuous rotational, Lorentz, and translational symmetry. The key idea
of improved discretization schemes, to be discussed in Sections 8, 12, and

