% SECTION 9: Fermion Doubling Problem in the naive action

% -------- PDF page 41 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

41

closer. In that case a much more reliable matching between the two theories is possible. At present the 1-loop matching between the lattice and
continuum theories is one of the larger sources of uncertainties.
6. The Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) Anomaly: In the continuum the flavor
singlet axial current has an anomaly. This shows up as part of the
UV regularization scheme. In the Pauli-Villars scheme one introduces
a heavy mass as the cutoff. This breaks γ5 invariance, while in dimensional regularization, γ5 is not well-defined away from 4 dimensions.
N aive fermions, as shown below, preserve the γ5 invariance but at the
expense of flavor doubling. A consequence of the doublers is a pairwise cancellation and no net anomaly. A viable lattice theory should
reproduce the ABJ anomaly.
Before discussing such “improved” actions, it is instructive to revisit the
construction of the naive Dirac action to highlight its problems.
9. Fermion Doubling Problem in the “naive” action
The problem with the naive discretization of the Dirac action, specified
by the operator M N in Eq. 7.7, is that in the continuum limit it gives
rise to 2d = 16 flavors rather than one. This doubling problem is readily
demonstrated by the inverse of the free field propagator (obtained by taking
the fourier transform of the action with all Uµ (x) = 1).
iX
S −1 (p) = mq +
γµ sin pµ a
(9.1)
a µ
which has 16 zeros within the Brillouin cell in the limit mq → 0. Defining
the momentum range of the Brillouin cell to be {−π/2, 3π/2}, the zeros
lie at pµ = 0 and π. As discussed later, this proliferation holds under very
general conditions specified by the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem [14], and
is intimately related to simultaneously preserving chiral symmetry. The
inclusion of the gauge fields does not solve the doubling problem.
Before discussing partial fixes, it is useful to investigate the properties
of these extra zero modes under chiral transformations. Let us define a
set of 16 4-vectors ΠA = {(0, 0, 0, 0), (π, 0, 0, 0), . . . , (π, π, π, π)} with A =
{1 . . . 16}, and consider the expansion of the massless propagator about
these points. Then
iX
γµ sin pµ a
S −1 (p, m = 0) =
a µ


% -------- PDF page 42 --------
Rajan Gupta

42
Table 3

The chiral sign and degeneracy factor for the doublers.
A

Degeneracy

XA

(0, 0, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 0, 0)

1
4

(1, 1, 0, 0)

6

+1
−1

(1, 1, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 1, 1)

4
1

=

iX
γµ sin(ΠA + k)µ a
a µ

=

iX
γµ SµA sin kµ a
a µ

≡

iX
γ̃µ sin kµ a ,
a µ

+1

−1
+1

(9.2)

where SµA = {+1, −1} depending on whether the µ component of ΠA is
{0, π}. In the last expression a new representation of gamma matrices has
been defined by the similarity transformation γ̃µ = YA γµ YA† where
Y
A
YA =
(γµ γ5 )nµ
(9.3)
µ

and nA
µ are {0, 1} depending on whether the momentum expansion in the
µ direction is about 0 or π. Now, γ̃5 = YA γ5 YA† = S1A S2A S3A S4A γ5 ≡ X A γ5 ,
with the signs X A given in table 3. Thus, the sixteen species break up
into two sets of 8 with chiral charge ±1, and render the theory anomalyfree. Consequently, this “naive” discretization is phenomenologically not
acceptable. The presence of doublers can, in fact, be traced to a larger
flavor symmetry of the naive fermion action as I now discuss.
In the continuum the mass-less Dirac action is invariant under the
U (1)V ⊗ U (1)A flavor transformations
ψL → VL ψL ,
ψR → VR ψR ,

ψ L → ψ L VL†

ψ R → ψ R VR† .

(9.4)

Since the left and right handed fields are only coupled through the mass
term, the vector symmetry VL = VR = eiθ holds for all m, whereas the


% -------- PDF page 43 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

43

axial symmetry VL = VR† = eiθ (or equivalently VL = VR = eiθγ5 ) holds
only for m = 0. The naive fermion action SN for a single flavor has a much
larger symmetry group, U (4)V ⊗ U (4)A , under




1
1
1 − ǫ(x)γ5 VL + 1 + ǫ(x)γ5 VR Γ†x ψ(x)
ψ(x) → Γx
2
2



 †
†1
†1
(9.5)
ψ(x) → ψ(x)Γx VL 1 + ǫ(x)γ5 + VR 1 − ǫ(x)γ5 Γx
2
2
if one considers translations by 2a. Γx is given in Eq. 11.1, the phase ǫ(x)
in Eq. 11.4, and Γx γ5 Γ†x = ǫ(x)γ5 . Here VL,R are general 4 × 4 unitary
matrices acting on the spinor index of the fermions. Even though there is,
in Eq. 9.5, a dependence on x through ǫ(x), this is a global symmetry as
specifying it at one point fixes it at all points.
To see how doubling arises, consider the vector (VL = VR ) discrete
subgroup with the thirty two elements {±YA } defined in Eq. 9.3. Eq. 9.2
shows that the YA shift the momenta by π/a along the direction specified
by A,
π
YA SF (k)YA† = SF (k + A) .
(9.6)
a
Since this is a similarity transform, the sixteen regions of the Brillouin
zone related by this transormation are physically equivalent. This analysis,
which relied only on the spinor structure of the action, makes it easy to
see why the doublers exist even for the interacting theory. In Section 11
this symmetry will be exploited to construct staggered fermions. In this
formulation the sixteen doublers are reduced to four, and at the same time
a U (1)V ⊗ U (1)ǫ symmetry (corresponding to when VL,R are just phases)
is retained. The U (1)ǫ plays the role of a chiral symmetry at finite a and
in the continuum limit becomes the U (1)A .
9.1. Generalities of Chiral Symmetry
In the massless limit of the continuum theory, the flavor symmetry at the
classical level is UV (1) × UA (1) × SUV (nf ) × SUA (nf ), where nf is the
number of light fermions. The unbroken UV (1) gives rise to baryon number
conservation. The UA (1) is broken by instanton contributions and the flavor
singlet axial current is anomalous. The SUA (nf ) is spontaneously broken
and the quark condensates acquire a non-zero expectation value in the
QCD vacuum. Associated with this spontaneously broken symmetry are
(n2f − 1) goldstone bosons, i.e. the pions. Chiral symmetry has played a


% -------- PDF page 44 --------
Rajan Gupta

44

very useful role in the continuum theory. For example, one can (i) classify
operators under distinct representations of SUL (nf ) × SUR (nf ), and chiral
symmetry prohibits mixing between operators in different representations,
(ii) derive relations between matrix elements of a given operator between
states with different number of pions in the final state (for example K →
ππ ↔ K → πππ), (iii) exploit the operator Ward identity, and (iv) derive
relations between correlation functions, i.e. the Ward-Takahashi identities.
It is therefore desirable to preserve chiral symmetry at finite a and not
just in the continuum limit. To determine if this is possible one needs to
understand the relationship between doublers and chiral symmetry in the
lattice theory.
The chiral symmetry defined in Eq. 7.11 is realized by the lattice theory
provided γ5 M + M γ5 = 0. It is easy to verify that the näive lattice action
satisfies the hermiticity property
γ5 M γ5 = M †

(9.7)

Thus, in the massless limit, the Euclidean lattice action has to be antihermitian for chiral symmetry, Eq. 7.11, to hold. This is true of M N
given in Eq. 7.7, and was accomplished by simply taking the symmetric
difference for the derivative. The important question is – what are the
general conditions under which a lattice theory with this realization of
chiral symmetry exhibits doublers. The answer is given by the NielsenNinomiya theorem [14]. Consider a generalized action such that S −1 (p, m =
0) = iF (p). Then, if
• the function F (p) is periodic in momentum space with period 2π/a.
(This is a consequence of translation invariance.)
• the lattice momenta are continuous in the range {0, 2π}. This is true in
the L → ∞ limit at all values of the lattice spacing.
• F (p) is continuous in momentum space. This is guaranteed if the interactions are local.
• F (p) → pµ γµ for small pµ and as a → 0 to match the continuum theory.
• the action has chiral symmetry, i.e. it satisfies the hermiticity property
γ5 M γ5 = M † and the massless Dirac action is anti-hermitian.
the theory will have doublers. It is easy to understand this from the
schematic one dimensional plot of F (p) shown in Fig. 6 which highlights
the fact that F (p) has to have an even number of zeros under the above


% -------- PDF page 45 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

.
−π/2

45

.

F(p)

p

3π/2

Fig. 6. A schematic 1-d representation of the massless inverse propagator F (p).

conditions. The ± slopes imply that one state is left moving while the other
is right moving. In 1-dimension the direction is the same as handedness,
consequently left-handed and right-handed fields come in inseparable pairs,
and together form a Dirac fermion.
The key consequence of the Nielsen-Ninomiya theorem is that one cannot
define a lattice theory with chiral fermions. For example if one writes
down M N for a left-handed Dirac fermion, then its doubler will be righthanded but have the same transformation under L ⊗ R. Consequently, the
two “states” coexist to form a Dirac fermion. Assuming that the NielsenNinomiya theorem is air-tight, then how does one proceed to (i) define a
lattice theory without doublers and which recovers chiral symmetry in the
continuum limit, and (ii) define chiral gauge theories on the lattice?
The answer to the first question will be given by explicit reconstruction of
Wilson’s and staggered fixes. An alternate very exciting new development,
which I will not do justice to, is the resurrection [53] of the Ginsparg-Wilson
condition for a chirally symmetric formulation [54]
γ5 D + Dγ5 = aDγ5 D .

(9.8)

Lüscher has recently presented a clear analysis of how this condition allows the construction of a lattice theory without doublers and with chiral
symmetry, avoids the NN theorem, and gives the ABJ anomaly [55]. Unfortunately, the bottleneck with this alternative is the lack of a closed form

