% SECTION 3: Scope of Lattice QCD Calculations

% -------- PDF page 10 --------
Rajan Gupta

10

D ! Kl K ! l
D ! K  l

0
VCKM  B
@

B ! l
B ! l

2 =2

A3 ( i) 1

1
2 =2
A2 C
A
A3 (1  i)
A2
1
1

Bd0 {B 0d

Mixing

BB )

(

K   B ! Dl
Bs0 {B 0s B !
Rare
B ! D l
Mixing
Decays
(BBs )

Fig. 1. The CKM matrix in the Wolfenstein parameterization. I show examples of physical processes that need to be measured experimentally and compared with theoretical
predictions via the “master” equation to estimate various elements of the CKM matrix.

3. Scope of Lattice QCD Calculations
The primary goal of LQCD is to test whether QCD is the correct theory
of strong interactions. Most particle physicists believe that the answer is
yes because of its successes in describing processes with large momentum
transfer, its mathematical elegance, and uniqueness. However, quantitative
confirmation is lacking. The problem with the conventional perturbative
approach (expansion in a small parameter) when analyzing hadronic pro< 1 GeV is that the strong coupling constant αs ∼ 1. Thus,
cess at scales ∼
perturbation theory in αs is not reliable. As a result we cannot calculate
the masses of mesons and baryons from QCD even if we are given αs and
the masses of quarks. This is illustrated in Fig. 2 where I show a comparison between the binding energy of a hydrogen atom and that of the
proton. It turns out that almost all the mass of the proton is attributed to
the strong non-linear interactions of the gluons.
Simulations of lattice QCD have six unknown input parameters. These
are the coupling constant αs and the masses of the up, down, strange, charm
and bottom quarks (the top quark is too short lived, 0.4 × 10−24 seconds,


% -------- PDF page 11 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

ep+

QED

Hydrogen Atom

u

QCD

u
d

Proton

11

M e = 0.5 MeV
M p = 938 MeV
Ebinding = 13.6 eV
(EM force)

M u ~ 3 MeV
M d ~ 6 MeV
M p = 938 MeV
(Strong force)

Fig. 2. An illustration of the diﬀerence in the binding energy between the electron and
the proton in a hydrogen atom (interacting via electromagnetic forces) and the quarks
in a proton (strong force).

to form bound states and is thus not suitable for lattice studies). Once
these have been fixed in terms of six precisely measured masses of hadrons,
thereafter, the masses and properties of the hundreds of other particles
made up of these quarks and gluons have to agree with experiments. For
example, consider the chiral perturbation theory (χPT) relation for the
pion mass
(Mπ+ )2 = Bπ (mu + md ) + Cπ (mu + md )2 + . . . .

(3.1)

Lattice calculations will provide a check of this relation and fix the constants Bπ , Cπ , . . ., i.e. constrain the chiral lagrangian. In addition, having
measured Mπ for a number of values of the quark mass, one can invert
Eq. 3.1 to determine the current quark masses. I shall call such tests of
QCD and the determination of the six unknown parameters of the SM a
direct application of lattice QCD.


% -------- PDF page 12 --------
Rajan Gupta

12

d
D

0

K
c

s
W

e−
ν

Fig. 3. The Feynman diagram for the semi-leptonic decay D − → K 0 e− ν e . The QCD
corrections are illustrated by the various gluons being exchanged between the initial and
ﬁnal hadrons. The leptonic vertex can be calculated reliably using perturbation theory,
whereas the hadronic vertex requires non-perturbative methods.

The second area in which perturbative estimates are not reliable is in
the calculation of the matrix elements occurring in the weak decays of
hadrons. The reason is that the non-perturbative QCD corrections to the
basic weak process can be large due to the exchange of soft gluons between
the initial and final states. This is illustrated in Fig. 3 for the case of
the semi-leptonic decay D → Klν. In this case the matrix element of
the weak interactions Hamiltonian between the initial D meson and final
kaon receives large corrections from QCD which cannot be estimated using
PQCD.
The result of the experiment is a number, i.e. the decay rate. To check
whether the Standard Model prediction is in agreement with this number
theorists must derive an analytical expression for the same process. This
expression, in general, consists of a product of three parts: a combination
of the parameters in the SM , matrix elements (M E) of the interaction
Hamiltonian between the initial and final states, and kinematic factors.
(This is the well-known Fermi’s golden rule.) Schematically one can write
this “master” equation as follows.



Expt.# = SM parameters matrix elements kinematic factors . (3.2)
Thus, for each such experimental number one gets a constraint on one
particular combination of the SM parameters provided the M E are known.


% -------- PDF page 13 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

13

By using several precision experiments and calculating the necessary M E
one can over-constrain the model and therefore test it. I shall call lattice
calculations of M E an “indirect” probe of Standard Model parameters
as one usually needs additional phenomenological/experimental input to
extract the unknown parameters via the master equation.
Physicists have been busy calculating and measuring these parameters
for the last 25 years, so one already has reasonable estimates. It is, therefore, useful to keep in mind the level of precision that lattice calculations
have to aim for to make an impact. Non-lattice estimates, taken from the
1996 Review of Particle Properties and from Prof. Buras’s lectures [10],
are
Parameters
Value
Comments
mu (M S, 2 GeV)
md (M S, 2 GeV)
ms (M S, 2 GeV)
mc (M S, mc )
mb (M S, mb )

3-4.5 MeV
5-8 MeV
100-140 MeV
1.0-1.6 GeV
4.1-4.6 GeV

MHiggs

χPT, sum-rules
χPT, sum-rules
χPT, sum-rules
J/ψ sprectra
Υ spectra
Not Found

αs (MZ )

0.118 ± 0.003

World average

|Vud |

0.9736 ± 0.0010

|Vus |

0.2196 ± 0.0023

|Vub |
|Vcb |

(3.3 ± 0.2 ± 0.4 ± 0.7)10−3
0.040 ± 0.003

n → peνe and
µ → eν e νµ
K + → π 0 e+ νe and
KL0 → π ± e∓ νe
B → πlν; B → ρlν
B → Xc lν and
B → D∗ lν

|ǫ|
|ǫ/ǫ′ |

2.26 × 10−3
0 − 30 × 10−4

K 0 ↔ K 0 mixing
K → ππ decays

Note that only the magnitude of the CKM elements can be determined from
experiments. Clearly, the most enticing opportunity for lattice QCD is to
help determine the quark masses, αs , and the essentially unknown Wolfenstein parameters ρ and η. For other elements of VCKM one has reasonable
estimates, however here too further progress requires significant improvement in the estimates of the hadronic matrix elements. Phenomenologists

