% SECTION 19: The strong coupling constant alpha_s

% -------- PDF page 133 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

133

18.6. Mass Inequalities
In addition to getting hard numbers, LQCD (actually Euclidean field theory) has also prompted the derivation of rigorous mass-inequalities. The
first such was derived by Weingarten showing that the pion is the lightest
meson state of non-zero isospin in QCD [177]. Consider the 2-point correlation function for mesons, i.e. O = uΓd where Γ can be any one of the 16
elements of the Clifford algebra. Then
ΓΓ (τ ) =

0 dΓu(τ, y) uΓd(0, x) 0

=

TrSFd (0, x; τ, y)ΓSFu (τ, y; 0, x)Γ

=

TrΓγ5 SFd† (τ, y; 0, x)γ5 ΓSFu (τ, y; 0, x) .

(18.4)

For the special case of the pion, Γγ5 = 1, consequently Γπ (τ ) has the maximum value on each configuration. Furthermore, for mu = md it is the
absolute square of the propagator. The other spin-parity states involve γ
matrices. Since these have both plus and minus signs, the various spinor
terms in the trace have cancellations. The second property needed to translate this property of correlation functions into an inequality on masses is
that the integration measure for QCD is positive, i.e. each configuration
contributes with the same sign. Thus, Γπ (τ ) ≥ ΓΓ (τ ) for all τ . Since,
Γ(τ ) ∼ e−mτ , the inequality implies that the pion is the lightest meson.
Concurrently, Witten and Nussinov derived further inequalities. Examples of these are
– The electromagnetic mass shift in the pion is positive [179]. Specifically what is shown is that Vµ3 (k)Vµ3 (−k) − A3µ (k)A3µ (−k) ≥ 0 for any
Euclidean k.
– For mesons with valence flavors A and B the inequality 2MAB ≥
MAA + MBB holds in the limit that annihilation into gluonic states can be
neglected in the flavor singlet correlators [179,178].
Recently West has applied/extended these methods to glueballs [181].
He shows that 0++ is the lightest glueball state.
19. The strong coupling constant αs
Spectroscopy studies, in addition to testing QCD, allow the determination
of some of the fundamental parameters of the SM, i.e, the coupling αs and
the quark masses. To determine αs , one needs to know not only its strength
but also the energy scale Q at which the coupling is measured. The calculation of αs , in general, proceeds as follows. One chooses a quantity O


% -------- PDF page 134 --------
Rajan Gupta

134

that can be measured very accurately, either in high energy experiments or
via non-perturbative methods on the lattice, and for which a perturbative
expansion is known, i.e.,
X
O =
An αns (Q) ,
(19.1)
n

where the An are the perturbative coefficients. Inverting this relation gives
αs (Q).
One promising lattice approach for calculating αs has been pioneered by
the NRQCD collaboration [110]. They examine several short-distance O ,
like the expectation value of small Wilson loops, that can be calculated very
accurately on the lattice and for which perturbative expansions are known
to at least O(α2s ). The scale Q characterizing these lattice observable is
typically of the form Q = C/a where a is the lattice spacing and C is a
constant that needs to be fixed. They determine C relevant to O by
evaluating the mean momentum flow in the perturbative expressions for
these quantities. The scale 1/a is fixed using level splittings in quarkonia.
In particular they use the spin-averaged S-P and the 1S-2S splittings in the
Upsilon system. The advantage of using these splittings is that they show
negligible sensitivity to the precise tuning of the bottom quark mass, and
the corrections due to light quark loops are expected to be small.
Finally, to convert from αs in the lattice scheme to α
they use the
MS
3
two loop relation, and include reasonable estimates of the αs term in the
error analysis. Their final estimate
αMS (MZ ) = 0.1174(24)

(19.2)

includes quenching uncertainties. This remarkably precise result is consistent with the world average of experimental determinations, αs = 0.118(3),
as shown in Fig. 33.
An alternate method for measuring αs has been carried out by the ALPHA collaboration [182]. In their method, called the Schrödinger functional approach, αs is defined by measuring the response of the lattice
system to an external field. They fix the lattice scale a using the force
at some fixed distance (R0 = 0.5 fermi). They evolve their coupling to a
very high scale using a non-perturbative renormalization group stepping
(0)
procedure. At this high scale they define ΛMS using the two loop relation
and include the three loop uncertainty, which is small, in error estimates.
They have completed the calculation for the quenched theory with the re(0)
sult ΛMS = 251(21) MeV, and are now doing the nf = 2 simulations [182].
The corresponding value αMS (90 GeV) = 0.0818(10) is lower than in nature. This difference is attributed to having neglected sea quark effects.


% -------- PDF page 135 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

0.04

135

Λ(5) (in MS scheme, in GeV)
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.8
Deep inelastic
GLS sum rule
Deep inelastic HERA
Jets at HERA
QQ lattice
τ decay
decay
Fragmentation
R(e+e−)
e+e− event shape
Z width*
AVERAGE

0.10

0.12

0.14
αs(MZ)

0.16

Fig. 33. Summary of the values of αs (MZ ) and Λ(5) (the QCD scale for 5 active
quark ﬂavors) extracted from various processes. These are ordered from top to bottom
by increasing energy scale of measurements. This ﬁgure is reproduced from the 1996
Review of Particle Physics, updated to show the latest lattice result, αM S (MZ ) =
0.1174 ± 0.0024. It is a remarkable conﬁrmation of QCD that the αs extracted from
processes at diﬀerent scales has the same value.

A similar low value is obtained in the NRQCD analyses if no corrections
are made for the quenched approximation. For details of the Schrödinger
functional method see the lectures by Prof. Lüscher at this school.

