% SECTION 14: Confinement and Asymptotic Freedom

% -------- PDF page 80 --------
Rajan Gupta

80

14. Confinement and Asymptotic Freedom
For any theory to provide a successful description of strong interactions
it should simultaneously exhibit the phenomena of confinement at large
distances and asymptotic freedom at short distances. Lattice calculations
support the hypothesis that for non-abelian gauge theories the two domains
are analytically connected, and confinement and asymptotic freedom coexist. Similary, one way to show that QCD is the correct theory of strong
interactions is that the coupling extracted at various scales (using experimental data or lattice simulations) is unique in the sense that its variation
with scale is given by the renormalization group. The data for αs is reviewed in Section 19. In this section I will discuss what these statements
mean and imply.
14.1. Asymptotic Freedom
The term asymptotic freedom implies that the running coupling g → 0 as
the momentum scale of the probe µ → ∞. This is characterized by the
β-function
µ

∂g
= −β(g) = −(β0 g 3 + β1 g 5 + . . .)
∂µ

(14.1)

where β(g) is positive for non-abelian gauge groups. In this case g = 0 is
a UV stable fixed point of the theory, and about this point the theory can
be analyzed using standard perturbative expansions. This novel behavior
was confirmed by ’t Hooft, Politzer, and by Gross and Wilczek who showed
that the perturbative β-function satisfies Eq. 14.1 [116], i.e., for N colors
and nf active flavors
11N − 2nf
)/16π 2 ,
3
34N 2 10N nf
nf (N 2 − 1)
β1 = (
−
−
)/(16π 2 )2 .
3
3
N

β0 = (

(14.2)

These two leading terms in the expansion of β(g) are gauge and regularization scheme invariant. From these it is easy to see that β(g) is positive
for nf < 8. This result was essential in establishing QCD as the theory of strong interactions for it explained existing experimental data which
showed that the strength of strong interactions decreases as the momentum
exchanged in a process increases.
Asymptotic freedom, Eq. 14.1, implies that QCD dynamically generates
a mass scale. Integrating Eq. 14.1 from momentum scale µ1 to µ2 with


% -------- PDF page 81 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

81

µ2 > µ1 and keeping only the β0 term to simplify the standard calculation,
gives
1
µ2
1
,
−
= log
2β0 g 2 (µ2 )
2β0 g 2 (µ1 )
µ1

(14.3)

i.e. the coupling constant of non-abelian gauge theories depends logarithmically on the momentum scale of the process. Rewriting Eq. 14.3
1
− log µ = constant
2β0 g 2 (µ)

µ
1
=
=⇒ exp
2
2β0 g (µ)
ΛQCD
=⇒

αs (µ) =

g 2 (µ)
1
=
µ
4π
8πβ0 log ΛQCD

(14.4)

introduces ΛQCD , the invariant scale of the theory with dimensions of mass.
Thus QCD, a theory with a dimensionless coupling constant and no intrinsic mass scale in the absence of quark masses, dynamically generates a mass
scale. This happens because in order to specify g one has to also specify
a momentum scale at which it is defined. Extending the above analysis to
include β1 in Eq. 14.1 gives
β1

 2β02

1
1
exp[−
ΛQCD = lim µ
] ≡ µ fp g(µ) .(14.5)
2
2
µ→∞
β0 g (µ)
2β0 g (µ)
This 2-loop definition of ΛQCD is not unique; the value of ΛQCD depends
on the the precise relation between g and µ. However, once the value
of Λ is determined in one scheme it can be related to that in any other
perturbative scheme. For example, in the lattice regularized theory Λlattice
is also defined by Eq. 14.5 but with µ replaced by 1/a. Then to 1-loop



1
1
1
ΛQCD
.
(14.6)
= µa exp −
−
Λlattice
2β0 g 2 (µ) g 2 (a)
In perturbation theory the two coupling constants are related as




4
2
2
2
2
2
g (µ) = g (a) 1 − β0 g (a) log(µa) − log C + O(g )

(14.7)

By substituting Eq. 14.7 into Eq. 14.6 one finds
ΛQCD = C Λlattice

(14.8)

i.e. the two constants, ΛQCD and Λlattice , are related by a multiplicative
constant. To calculate C requires knowing the finite part of the coupling


% -------- PDF page 82 --------
Rajan Gupta

82
Table 6

and Λlatt as a function of
The relation between ΛM OM and Λ
MS
the number of active ﬂavors. The results for ΛM OM /Λlatt with g
deﬁned by the triple gluon vertex are in Feynman gauge.
nf
Λ

/Λlatt

MS
ΛM OM /Λlatt

0

1

2

3

4

28.8

34.0

41.1

51.0

65.5

83.4

89.4

96.7

105.8

117.4

constant renormalization to 1-loop in both the lattice and continuum regularization schemes [117,36]. The results are listed in Table 6 for ΛMOM
. It is important to note that even though the above definition
and Λ
MS
and estimate of ΛQCD is made using perturbation theory, it is intrinsically
a non-perturbative quantity.
All dimensionful quantities in lattice simulations are measured in units
of the lattice spacing, for example one measures M a and not M . Such
dimensionless quantities vary with g as
Mi a = ci fi (g) ≡ ci Λinon−pert a .

(14.9)

where the ci are constants representing the continuum value and fi are
scaling functions. Lattice correlation lengths ξi ≡ 1/Mi a diverge as the
fixed point at g = 0 is approached. This divergence is an artifact – it is the
unit of measurement a that is going to zero and not Mi . This is precisely
what one wants to have happen to get rid of the scaffold (lattice) erected to
regularize the theory. Non-perturbative renormalization consists of taking
the continuum limit holding some physical quantity Mi fixed while allowing
a → 0 according to fi (g). The particular quantity Mi (string tension, or
nucleon mass, etc.) held fixed defines the renormalization condition, and
the constraint between a and g is the scaling relation.
– Scaling: The hypothesis of scaling is that all fi (g) converge to a universal scaling function f (g) = Λnon−pert a. The renormalization condition
is then independent of the state used to define it. For g < gscaling each
lattice quantity is characterized by the non-perturbative number ci and all
dimensionless ratios of physical quantities are independent of g.
– Asymptotic Scaling: Close to the fixed point at g = 0, perturbation
theory is apposite and all fi (g) → fpert (g) → ΛQCD a.
Lattice simulations, therefore, provide continuum results to within some
error tolerance from simulations done in a neighborhood of g = 0. In this
region scaling holds. For a fixed error criteria, the extent of this scaling
window can be enlarged by improving the action and operators as discussed


% -------- PDF page 83 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

83

in Section 8. For simulations done outside the scaling window it is imperative that a reliable extrapolation to a = 0 be done. Obviously, one way
to get an upper bound on the errors is to compare the measured scaling
function with fpert (g). The good news is that simulations in the past few
years show that corrections to scaling can be reduced to a√few percent level
< ξ/a < 10 ( where ξ/a = 1/ σa). This correfor lattice spacings with 5 ∼
∼
<
<
sponds to 2 ∼ 1/a ∼ 4 GeV. Consequently, realistic results with physical
light quarks can be obtained on lattices of side ∼ 75 − 150, and for many
quantities, like those involving the heavy quarks, much smaller lattices are
sufficient. The goal of the lattice approach is twofold. First, improve the
discretization of the action and operators to extend the scaling region to
stronger coupling, and second do simulations at a number of points within
this region and remove the remaining errors by extrapolation to a = 0.
An implication of the above discussion is that if all states in QCD have
zero mass in the continuum limit then g = 0 would be a trivial fixed point
as the renormalized coupling gR would also be zero. On the other hand one
can ask whether some of the states of QCD can be massless while the others
are massive? It is interesting to note that we can actually say something
about this aspect of the spectrum of QCD once the scaling behavior is fixed
by Eq. 14.9. In fact, under the following two assumptions, the pure gauge
sector of QCD will have a mass gap:
– There are no zero mass states at any finite non-zero value of g, i.e. the
dimensionless quantity M a does not vanish at any non-zero value of the
lattice spacing a in a region that lies in the same thermodynamic phase as
the continuum limit at a = 0.
– There exists only one relevant coupling g in QCD, and corresponding to
it a single universal scaling function defined by say Eq. 14.5. In this case
the scaling behavior of all observables is fixed and all mass-ratios have to
stay finite as the continuum limit is taken.
These two assumptions are borne out by present numerical data, i.e. there
is no evidence for a massless state in the pure gauge sector. Also there is
no indication of a phase boundary separating the region where simulations
have been done and g = 0. Therefore, combining lattice data with renormalization group scaling, QCD predicts that the lightest glueball state is
massive.
This prediction does not change with the introduction of nf flavors of
massless quarks into the theory. Spontaneously broken chiral symmetry
will give rise to n2f − 1 massless pions in the spectrum. To take the chiral
limit one has to tune the quark masses to zero to define the physical world.
This tuning has to be done at each value of a. Thus one cannot form mass-


% -------- PDF page 84 --------
Rajan Gupta

84

ratios with respect to these Goldstone states as the corresponding ci (g) are
tuned to zero.
To conclude, once we have verified that scaling (perturbative or nonperturbative) exists then the only unknowns needed to predict the spectrum of QCD are the constants ci . Asymptotic freedom simplifies QCD
by providing an analytical prediction of the universal scaling behavior as
g → 0. Current data show that the coefficients ci , which are intrinsically
non-perturbative, can be extracted using LQCD from simulations done at
a ∼ 0.1 fermi.
14.2. Confinement
There are two ways one can test whether a theory confines. One, demonstrate that the free energy of an isolated charge is infinite; two, show that
the potential energy between two charges grows with distance. The first
test shows that it takes infinite energy to add an isolated test charge to the
system, while the second shows that it requires infinite energy to separate
two charges by infinite distance. I shall show that the first is probed by the
expectation value of the Wilson line hLi in the pure gauge theory, while the
second by the expectation value of Wilson loops hWi or by the correlation
function hL(τ )L† (0)i.
14.2.1. Wilson Loops
The extra
R action associated with an external charge placed in a gauge field
is SJ = d4 xJµa Aaµ . For a point charge J(x) = δ 4 (x), SJ is given by the
path ordered integral of the gauge field along the world line of the charge.
Thus
W = e−SJ ∼ e−V (R)T

(14.10)

for a R × T rectangular Wilson loop. One can regard the expectation value
of a Wilson loop as the creation of a qq pair at time T = 0 at point R/2,
separated instantaneously to R and 0, allowed to evolve for time T , and
then allowed to annihilate. Amongst the many terms (instanteous creation,
annihilation, . . .) that contribute to the action for this procedure is that
due to the potential between two static charges separated by distance R
and integrated for time T , i.e. V (R)T . Thus
1
loghW(R, T )i .
(14.11)
T
The simplest Ansätz for a confining potential is the Cornell potential
α
V (R) = V0 + σR − ,
(14.12)
R
V (R) = lim −
T →∞


% -------- PDF page 85 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

85

where σ is the string tension. At large distances σR dominates, while
at short distances it is the Coulomb term α/R that is relevant. Such a
potential, therefore, simultaneously exhibits confinement and asymptotic
freedom. For such linear potentials large Wilson loops show an area law,
loghW(R, T )i ∝ RT , and thus probe confinement. A state-of-the-art calculation by the Wuppertal collaboration [118] of V (R) for SU(3) gauge theory
is shown in Fig. 10. It shows the expected behavior – a linear rise at large
R and a Coulomb behavior at small R.
One can also extract the potential from the correlation function
hL(R)L† (0)i of Wilson lines, defined in Section 14.2.3, pointing in the T
direction and separated by distance R. It is easy to see that this correlation
function is equivalent to a Wilson loop with the sides at T = 0, NT removed.
The Wilson lines are closed due to the periodic boundary conditions on the
gauge links and thus individually gauge invariant. This correlation function
measures the action due to two static test charges separated by distance
R.
Measurements of the potential provide a way to set the scale of lattice
calculations. One approach is to use σ. The string tension can be extracted
from the slope of V (R) at large R or from the asymptotic behavior of Creutz
ratios [120]

σ = lim − log
T →∞
R→∞



hW(R, T )ihW(R + 1, T + 1)i
hW(R + 1, T )ihW(R, T + 1)i



.

(14.13)

It can be measured very accurately in lattice simulations, however, its
physical value is either inferred from the Regge slope or from potential
models. Regge phenomenology gives the relation Ml2 (l) = l/α′ + c where
Ml is the mass of a state on the Regge trajectory with orbital angular
momentum l. To get a relation between σ and α′ two approaches are used:
(1) string models which give σ = 1/2πα′ , and (ii) potential models which
give σ = 1/8α′ [123]. The value of α′ depends on the quark mass. For
example α′ from the light hadrons, cc, and bb is 0.85 → 0.85/2 →≈ 0.85/4.5
GeV−2 . It is customary to choose the value α′ = 0.85 GeV−2 from the light
sector as it is expected to be most sensitive to the large distance part of
the potential. Combining this with the string Ansätz σ = 1/2πα′ yields
√
σ ≈ 440 MeV [124,125]. A survey of results from potential models can
2
be found in [126] and one finds σ varies
√ in the range 0.18 − 0.22 GeV . In
most lattice calculations the value σ = 440 MeV is used, however, one
should be aware of the significant uncertainty in its extraction.


% -------- PDF page 86 --------
Rajan Gupta

86

Fig. 10. The static qq potential in the quenched approximation obtained by the Wuppertal collaboration [118]. The data at β = 6.0, 6.2, 6.4 and 6.8 has been scaled by R0
deﬁned in Eq. 14.14, and normalized such that V (R0 ) = 0. The collapse of the diﬀerent
sets of data on to a single curve after the rescaling by R0 is evidence for scaling. The
linear rise at large R implies conﬁnement.

An even better quantity, proposed by Sommer [127], is the distance scale
R0 defined through the force between two static charges
R2

∂V (R)
= 1.65
∂R R=R0

(14.14)


% -------- PDF page 87 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

87

Fig. 11. The static qq potential with two ﬂavors of dynamical fermions obtained by the
Wuppertal collaboration [119]. The dynamical quark mass in the β = 6.0, κ = 0.156
simulation is ∼ 2ms while that at κ = 0.1575 is ∼ ms . The rest is same as in Fig. 10.
These data lie lower than the quenched points, however, for these dynamical quark
masses there is no evidence yet of string breaking at large R.

The Cornell and Richardson potentials, which have been very successful in
predicting levels of charmonium and Upsilon system, yield
R0 ≈ 0.49 fermi

(14.15)

Setting the scale using R0 has the following advantages: (i) its value is
not very sensitive to the choice of the phenomenological potential, (ii) it is
defined at an intermediate distance where phenomenological potentials are


% -------- PDF page 88 --------
Rajan Gupta

88

highly constrained by the cc and bb spectra, (iii) lattice measurements of
V (R) at these intermediate distances can be obtained with high precision,
and (iv) this construction is valid for both full and quenched QCD. The
status of the current quenched data from three collaborations is shown in
Fig. 12. The data agree, √
and it turns out that over this same range of
β the relation R0 = 1.18/ σ holds to a very good approximation. (The
σ is extracted from the large R behavior of the qq potential as discussed
above.) Thus, in subsequent analyses of lattice data I will assume this
relation when using either σ or R0 to set the scale.
For full QCD, the linear rising potential is screened. The string between
the qq breaks when the energy is large enough to pop an additional qq out
of the vacuum and create two mesons. This phenomena of screening can be
tested by plotting V (R) for different values of the dynamical quark mass
and observing the flattening of the linear rise. The value of R/R0 at which
the flattening should occur should decrease with mq . A recent analyses,
again by the Wuppertal collaboration, is shown in Fig. 11 [119]. The data
show no flattening – presumably because the sea quark masses used in the
update are not light enough to cause string breaking at these R/R0 .

14.2.2. Strong Coupling Expansion
Confinement, for β → 0, can be demonstrated using strong coupling expansions. I will illustrate this technique by two examples – string tension
and the 0++ glueball mass.
The strong coupling expansion for SU(N) gauge theory depends on the
following identities for integration over link matrices

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

Z

dg = 1

dg Uij = 0
dg Uij† = 0

dg Uij Ukl = 0
†
dg Uij† Ukl
=0
†
dg Uij Ukl
=

1
δil δjk
N


% -------- PDF page 89 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

89

Fig. 12. The scale R0 extracted from the static qq potential. The data in purple are
from [118,119,121] and the red line is a ﬁt to these data. The black line is the ﬁt
log(a/R0 ) = −1.6805 − 1.7139(β − 6) + 0.8155(β − 6.0)2 − 0.6667(β − 6)3 to the data
by the Alpha collaboration [122].

Z

dg Ui1 j1 . . . UiN jN =

1
ǫi ...i ǫj ...j .
N 1 N 1 N

(14.16)

The essential point is that the group integration gives a non-zero result
only if each link occurs in a combination from which a color singlet can
be formed. Eq. 14.16 shows this for the identity, “meson” and “baryon”
configuration of links.
The expectation value of the Wilson loop, at small β (large g) for the


% -------- PDF page 90 --------
Rajan Gupta

90

plaquette action, can be expanded as follows.
Z
+
−
1
WRT =
dU WRT eβ/2N (W11 +W11 )
Z
Z

1
+
−
+ W11
) + ...
dU WRT 1 + β/2N (W11
=
Z

(14.17)

+
−
where W11
, W11
are the two orientations of the plaquette and the trace
over color incides in each loop is implicit. An inspection of Fig. 13A shows
that the first non-zero contribution to the integral occurs when the loop
WRT is tiled by elementary plaquettes with the right orientation. Each
such plaquette brings a factor of β/2N from the expansion and another
factor of 1/N from the integration. (Note that SU(2) is special and the
combined factor is β/N 2 as the two orientations of the loop have the same
value, i.e. the trace is real.) Thus


β RT
1 + ...
(14.18)
WRT =
2N 2

where the leading corrections come from replacing any given tile with a
pillbox. Now using Eqs. 14.10 and 14.12 gives
σ = − log

β
+ O(β).
2N 2

(14.19)

Thus all gauge theories, including U(1), confine in the strong coupling limit.
What distinguishes U(1) from non-abelian gauge theories is that the U(1)
gauge theory has a phase transition at g 2 ∼ 1 (see Section 15), and the
physical theory (electrodynamics) lies in the weak coupling region which is
analytically disconnected from the confining strong coupling limit.
As a second application of the strong coupling expansion consider the
calculation of 0++ glueball mass. The minimum tiling of the connected
plaquette-plaquette correlation function is the rectangular tube consisting
of four sides of size 1 × T as shown in Fig. 13B. Thus

4T 

β
−M0++ T
W11 (T )W11 (0) ∼ e
=
1 + ... ,
(14.20)
2N 2
and
M0++ = −4 log

β
+ ... .
2N 2

(14.21)

√
The fact that the lowest order result M0++ / σ = 4 is very close to present
day estimates (see Section 18.3) is fortuitous.


% -------- PDF page 91 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

91

(A) Minimum tiling of a 6x6 Wilson loop.

(B) Tiling of one face of a plaquette-plaquette correlation function.
Fig. 13. Examples of minimum tiling of (A) a 6 × 6 Wilson loop, and (B) the plaquetteplaquette correlation function.

Exercise: What is the minimal tiling for the 0++ correlation function built
out of a R × R Wilson loop. Show that Eq. 14.20 holds independent of the
size of the loop.
14.2.3. Wilson/Polyakov Line
The Wilson line, pointing in say the time direction, is defined by the path
ordered product
hLi(x, y, z) = Tr P

NT
Y

t=1

U4 (x, y, z, t)

(14.22)


% -------- PDF page 92 --------
Rajan Gupta

92

It is gauge invariant due to periodic boundary conditions on gauge fields,
U4 (x, y, z, NT + 1) = U4 (x, y, z, 1). Repeating the above arguments made
for the Wilson loop one finds that the free energy of an isolated quark is
given by the Wilson/Polyakov line
hLi ∼ e−Fq NT .

(14.23)

Thus, the possibility of having isolated charges in the theory requires Fq
be finite.
In addition to gauge invariance, SU(N) gauge theories have a global
Z(N) invariance. It consists of multiplying all links on a given time slice
by the same element z of Z(N) without changing the action. Under this
transformation hLi → zhLi. Such a global symmetry can be spontaneously
broken. Thus we have two possibilities
Broken :
U nbroken :

hLi =
6 0

hLi = 0

Deconfined (Fq finite)
Confined

(Fq infinite)

(14.24)

Thus, hLi is an order parameter, and tests for confinement in pure gauge
theories. It is also used to probe the location and order of the finite temperature transition – a discontinuity in hLi signals a first order transition,
whereas a continuous change implies second order.
Svetitsky and Yaffe [128] argued that for the purposes of determining
the order of the finite temperature transition the relevant effective theory is
a 3-dimensional spin model of short-ranged interactions (between Wilson
lines reduced to spin variables) with a Z(N) symmetry. Then using the
universality classes known from renormalization group analyses, they predicted that the transition for SU(2) should be second order (Ising class),
whereas for SU(N≥ 3) it should be first order (Pötts class). Numerical
results are consistent with these predictions, in particular for SU(2) the
critical exponents have been determined using standard techniques of Statistical Mechanics and found to agree with those of the 3-dimensional Ising
model [129].
In the presence of dynamical quarks, it is easy to see that the discretized
Dirac action is not invariant under the Z(N) symmetry. Consequently,
hLi =
6 0 for all values of β, so hLi is no longer an order parameter. Nevertheless, changes (discontinuous or continuous) in it are used to search for
the location of the finite temperature phase transition and its order.

