% SECTION 16: Errors in Lattice Results

% -------- PDF page 98 --------
98

Rajan Gupta

mental and adjoint representations. The question, therefore, is whether
there exist other second order transition points at which all correlation
lengths (measured in lattice units) diverge i.e. where a non-trivial continuum limit exists. The commonly held belief, supported by numerical data,
is that all such points lie on the hypersurface defined by gef f = 0. The long
distance behavior of these theories is controlled by the fixed point defined
with respect to a suitable renormalization group transformation. Taking
the continuum limit of the lattice theory on this hypersurface provides a
non-perturbative definition of QCD. This is the standard scenario.
An alternative scenario is the presence of a non-trivial fixed point at
gef f 6= 0 [140]. If this unlikely possibility turns out to be true then the
perturbative relation between gef f and a, based on asymptotic freedom,
would change – the coupling would no longer run to zero as the momentum
scale Q → ∞. This could be exposed by precise measurements of αs as a
function of Q2 , or by a detailed search for non-trivial second order phase
transitions in the lattice theory.
In either case the non-perturbative lattice analyses of quantities such as
the spectrum and weak matrix elements does not change. To get to the
continuum limit we would still extrapolate the lattice data in a to a = 0.
Only the PQCD relation between a and g would be invalid, consequently
extrapolations using the perturbative scaling relation could not be used.
My bottom line on this issue, having mentioned the heretical view, is to
proceed assuming that the standard scenario is correct.

16. Errors in Lattice Results
Numerical simulations of lattice QCD introduce both statistical and a number of systematic errors. I have collected together a brief description of the
various errors here, and in the remainder of the article I will only give
quantitative estimates. I will label a particular systematic uncertainty
as negligible/important if it is negligible/comparable in magnitude to the
statistical error for that observable as determined in a state-of-the-art calculation.
16.1. Statistical errors
The monte carlo method for doing the functional integral employs statistical sampling. The results, therefore, have statistical errors. The current
understanding, based on agreement of results from ensembles generated
using different update algorithms, different initial starting configuration,


% -------- PDF page 99 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

99

and different random number generators in the Markov process, is that the
functional integral for QQCD is dominated by a single region. Second, we
find that configurations with non-trivial topology are properly represented
in an ensemble generated using a Markov chain based on small changes to
link variables. Based on these observations we conclude that the energy
√
landscape is simple, consequently, the statistical errors should fall as 1/ N ,
where N is the number of independent measurements. Tests like binning
of the data and the calculation of auto-correlation times for various observables are used to determine the monte-carlo time between independent
configurations.
Estimates of decorrrelation times in dynamical simulations are just becoming available and the understanding of decorrelation times for various
update algorithms and different fermion formulations is not complete. A
recent study of decorrelations for update of Wilson fermions [142] using the
hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm [141] (the algorithm of choice) presented very
encouraging results. They found that decorrelation time based on tunneling rate between different topological sectors (expected to be amongst the
slowest modes) was within a factor of two of standard probes like large
Wilson loops and hadron correlators, and ≈ 80 units of molecular dynamics time for mπ /Mρ ≥ 0.56. Thus trajectory lengths of 5000-10000 units,
which are feasible on todays computers, provide a reasonable statistical
sample. Even though details like how this decorrelation time grows with
decreasing quark mass still need to be filled in, it is clear that current
Monte Carlo algorithms do provide a reliable way of doing the functional
integral for both QQCD and full QCD.
16.2. Finite Volume
This is the simplest error to visualize as it is associated with using finite
lattices to represent an infinite system. Lüscher has shown that for sufficiently large lattices of side L, the finite volume corrections in the mass
M of a given state fall off as e−ML [27]. This anaylsis assumes that the
interactions with the mirror states on a periodic lattice are small. On small
lattices the wave-function of the states is squeezed, resulting in an much
more rapid increase of the mass with decreasing lattice size. This effect is
seen clearly for L < 1.5 fermi, where the finite size behavior fits a powerlaw, ∼ 1/L3 [143]. The goal, therefore, is to work on lattices large enough
such that the finite size effects are exponentially suppressed.
To determine the lattice size needed for observables involving quark
propagation I choose the pion as the test state as it the lightest and thus
has the largest correlation length. Results of quenched simulations show


% -------- PDF page 100 --------
100

Rajan Gupta

that for Mπ L ≥ 5 the exponential suppression applies and the corrections
are negligible. For physical value of Mπ this translates into L ≥ 7 fermi.
Another way of stating the same criteria is that the quantum mechanical
properties of hadrons, typically of size ≤ 1 fermi, are unaltered if the box
size is larger than 7 fermi. Current simulations explore quark masses in
the range mq ≥ ms /4 or equivalently Mπ /Mρ ≥ 0.4. For these “heavier
masses” the criteria Mπ L ≥ 5 translates into L ≥ 3 fermi. The lattices used
in the most recent calculations, for example the CP-PACS runs, discussed
later, satisfy this condition.
Another consequence of finite L is momentum resolution. For example,
the lowest non-zero momentum, and spacing, is 2π/La = 393 MeV for
L = 32 and 1/a = 2 GeV. One would like a much finer resolution when
investigating the dispersion relation for mesons and baryons or when calculating matrix elements required to study form-factors in semi-leptonic
and rare decays. This can only be done by increasing either L or a. Increasing L is limited by computer resources, while increasing a increases
discretization errors which are discussed next.
16.3. Finite lattice spacing errors
The lattice is merely a technical scaffold and the physical results are obtained by taking the a → 0 limit. At finite a, lattice results have discretization errors whose size depend on the degree to which the lattice
action and operators have been improved (see Sections 8, 12, and 13). As
discussed in Section 8, we employ two strategies for removing these errors.
First, improve the lattice action and operators so that the errors at fixed
a are small, and secondly, repeat the simulations at a number of values
of a and extrapolate to a = 0. Since the functional form used to characterize the errors is usually truncated to just the leading term in a, the
extrapolation has an associated systematic error. To get a handle on this
uncertainty, extrapolations have been done for three different formulations
(Wilson, clover, staggered) for which the leading corrections are different
(O(a), O(αa) − O(a2 ), O(a2 )). The difference between the three results in
the a = 0 limit is a measure of the residual uncertainty. I shall illustrate
this procedure for controlling the discretization errors in Section 20 where
the calculation of quark masses is discussed.
16.4. Chiral Extrapolations in the light quark masses
The physical u and d quark masses are too light to simulate on current
> 70 to avoid
lattices. For 1/a = 2 GeV, realistic simulations require L/a ∼


% -------- PDF page 101 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

101

finite volume effects, i.e. keeping Mπ L ≥ 5. Current biggest lattice sizes
are L/a = 32 for quenched and L/a = 24 for unquenched. Thus, to get
results for quantities involving light quarks, one typically extrapolates in
mu = md from the range ms /4 − 2ms using functional forms derived using
chiral perturbation theory but truncated to the first couple of terms. Since
the range of the chiral extrapolation is large, it is important to quantify the
size of the higher order chiral corrections. This requires precise data at a
large number of values of quark masses. Most of the current fits are based
on keeping just the lowest order terms as the quality of the data is not good
enough to quantify the various higher order corrections, and/or to identify
the quenched artifacts discussed in Section 16.8. The status of the current
data with respect to resolving these higher order corrections is discussed
in Section 18 where an analysis of SU(3) flavor symmetry breaking, for
example the mass differences between mesons and baryons within SU(3)
multiplets like the baryon octet and the decuplet, is presented.
Current simulations also neglect isospin breaking effects and electromagnetic contributions as these are a few MeV in nature, and smaller than the
present numerical resolution. The iso-spin symmetric mass is defined by
m = (mu + md )/2. For an exploratory analysis of iso-spin breaking effects
in the presence of a strong U(1) field see Ref. [144].
I expect that our understanding of the chiral corrections will change
significantly in the next two years due to the factor of 10-100 increase
in the computational power made available to LQCD. To study iso-spin
breaking effects properly requires dynamical lattices with roughly physical
values for mu and md . Such simulations are still a few years away.
16.5. Discretization of Heavy Quarks
Simulations of heavy quarks (c and b) have large discretization errors of
O(ma) in addition to the O(ΛQCD a) and O(pa). This is because quark
masses measured in lattice units, mc a and mb a, are of order unity for
2 GeV ≤ 1/a ≤ 5 GeV. Data show that these discretization errors are
large even for mc in the case of Wilson and clover actions. (Staggered
fermions do not have any advantage over Wilson-like discretizations for
heavy quarks and are hence not used to study heavy quarks.) A number of alternate approaches are being investigated to address this issue
(see Section 13). These include the non-relativistic QCD (NRQCD) formulation [108], lattice versions of the heavy quark effective theory [145], a
variant of the Dirac discretization that interpolates between NRQCD and
clover discretizations [113], and non-perturbatively O(a) improved SWclover fermions [104]. Many collaborations are testing these formulations,


% -------- PDF page 102 --------
Rajan Gupta

102

however, it is still too early to judge which approach will provide the best
solution to the simulations of heavy quarks.
16.6.

Matching between lattice and continuum scheme (renormalization
constants)

Experimental data are analyzed using some continuum renormalization
scheme like M S so, to make contact with phenomenology, results in the lattice regularization scheme have to be converted to the continuum scheme.
The perturbative relation between renormalized quantities in M S and the
lattice scheme are, in almost all cases, known only to 1-loop. Data show
that the O(αs ) corrections can be large, ∼ 10 − 50% depending on the
quantity at hand. However, as explained by Parisi [77] and by Lepage
and Mackenzie [78], these large corrections are mostly due to lattice artifacts which, once identified as coming from tadpole diagrams, can be
removed. The Lepage-Mackenzie prescription for reorganizing the lattice
perturbation theory to remove these artifacts has significantly reduced the
associated uncertainty. Nevertheless, the improvement is not uniform and
in many cases the corrections are still large, and the residual errors in TI 1loop perturbative estimates are hard to ascertain. The final step in improving the reliability of the matching factors is to develop non-perturbative
methods [146–148]. Significant progress has been made in setting up these
calculations, and once they are complete the uncertainties in existing results due to using 1-loop Z’s will be removed. An illustration of the effect of
using perturbative versus non-perturbative Z’s is presented in Section 20.1.
16.7. Operator mixing
As mentioned in Section 3, a major application of LQCD is to calculate
the matrix elements of operators that arise in the effective weak Hamiltonian between hadronic states. In addition to the question of the overall
normalization of these operators, the operators can, in general, mix with
operators of the same, higher, and lower dimensions. On the lattice this
mixing arises due to quantum corrections and discretization errors. The
set of lattice operators one has to consider is usually larger than those in
the continuum theory because at finite a the symmetries of the lattice theory are smaller than those of the continuum theory, for example the hard
breaking of chiral symmetry in Wilson fermions. In cases where there is
mixing with lower dimensional operators, the mixing coefficients have to
be known very accurately otherwise the power divergences overwhelm the
signal as a → 0. Similarly, in cases where there is mixing with operators of


% -------- PDF page 103 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

103

the same dimension but with different tensor structures, as in Wilson-like
actions due to the explicit breaking of chiral symmetry, the chiral behavior
may again be completely overwhelmed by these lattice artifacts if the coefficients are not known precisely. Examples where such mixing has posed
serious computational challenges are the matrix elements of 4-fermion operators needed in the calculation of the ∆I = 1/2 rule, BK , B6 , and B8 . In
these cases also non-perturbative methods for calculating the mixing coefficients are essential. For a discussion of these methods see Prof. Martinelli’s
lectures.
16.8. Quenched Approximation (QQCD)
This approximation is computationally the hardest to shed and quantify.
Since it plays a key role in today’s simulations, I will discuss it in some
detail. The approximation consists of ignoring the fermion contribution to
the path integral, i.e. setting det M = constant in Eq. 4.3. The sole reason
for this approximation is limitations of computer power. With known algorithms the computational requirements of full QCD simulations go up by
factors of 103 − 105 depending on the quark mass. Since QQCD is confining, asymptotically free, and shows spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking
( ψψ QQCD 6= 0), and differs from full QCD only in the relative weighting
of the background gauge configurations, the physics analyses are identical
in most cases. It is therefore considered reasonable to do detailed quenched
simulations in order to understand and control all other sources of errors
while waiting for better algorithms or the computer technology needed to
provide the required additional factor of 103 − 105 , i.e. 10-1000 teraflop
capability.
Physically, the quenched approximation corresponds to turning off vacuum polarization effects of quark loops. This is illustrated in Fig. 16 for
the pion correlator. One important consequence of neglecting vacuum polarization effects is the behavior of the potential between a qq pair as a
function of the separation. In the full theory the string breaks by the creation of a qq pair out of the vacuum, therefore at large distances there is a
screened potential between two mesons. For such screened potential large
Wilson loops should show a perimeter law. In QQCD the string does not
break and large Wilson loops show an area law. Thus the long distance
behavior of the two theories is very different and one might be led to believe
that QQCD is a bad approximation. However, because of confinement, the
long distance scale that is relevant to hadronic physics has a natural cutoff
of a few fermi. Thus, if one can match the potential between some fine
scale (∼ 0.01 fermi, below which asymptotic freedom makes the calcula-


% -------- PDF page 104 --------
104

Rajan Gupta

(A) Quenched QCD: quark loops neglected

(B) Full QCD
Fig. 16. An illustration of the diﬀerence between quenched QCD and QCD. QQCD has
no vacuum polarization loops on virtual gluon lines.

tions perturbative) and the typical size of hadrons (∼ 1 fermi) then QQCD
could give reasonable estimates for the hadronic spectrum. This argument
is really only applicable to heavy onia, where potential models work well.
For light quarks one simply has to do the simulations to estimate the size
of the distortions. In any case the community has proceeded by assuming
that the two theories can be roughly matched by adjusting the quenched
coupling constant at some scale like 0.5 fermi, or equivalently by adjusting the overall scale ΛQQCD , and hopes that the quenching corrections are


% -------- PDF page 105 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

105

π
ρ

ρ

ρ
π
(A)

(B)

Fig. 17. The ρππ coupling from the ρ → ππ decay and (B) the ρ correlator in full QCD.

small, 10 − 20%, for many cases. If this bears out then even QQCD would
yield many phenomenologically useful predictions.
In spite of the optimism, the fact remains that QQCD is not a unitary theory, so it is important to understand how it fails. I would like to
illustrate its shortcomings with the following examples.
We can calculate the ρππ coupling in both QCD and QQCD by measuring the three point function T [ρππ] illustrated in Fig 17A. The difference
between the two values is a measure of the validity of QQCD. On the other
hand the diagram shown in Fig 17B is absent in QQCD, and the ρ spectral
function does not have a cut beginning at 2Mπ . Thus, the ρππ coupling
cannot be extracted from an analysis of the ρ 2-point function in QQCD.
A very important difference between full QCD and QQCD is the behavior of the η ′ . In full QCD the singlet axial current is anomalous and the η ′
acquires a large mass due to the summation of vacuum polarization graphs
shown in Fig 18,
1
1
1
1
+ 2
M2
+ ... = 2
p2 − M 2
p − M 2 0 p2 − M 2
p − M 2 − M02

(16.1)

where, for simplicity I have approximated the gluonic coupling by a
momentum independent constant M02 . This is related to the topological susceptibility via the Witten-Veneziano relation M02 = 2nf χt /fπ2 =
2
Mη2′ + Mη2 − 2MK
[149]. In QQCD the absence of the vacuum polarization
diagrams means that the η ′ propagator has a single and a double pole, i.e.
(p2 − M 2 )−1 and the “hairpin” term (p2 − M 2 )−1 M02 (p2 − M 2 )−1 , where
M 2 is the Goldstone pion mass Mπ2 . The fact that the η ′ , in the limit
mq → 0 of QQCD, is massless has important consequences. Two groups,
Sharpe and collaborators [150], and Bernard and Golterman [151], have
investigated these by formulating a chiral perturbation theory for QQCD
which retains η ′ as an additional Goldstone boson. I illustrate the differ-


% -------- PDF page 106 --------
Rajan Gupta

106

............

1
2
p - m2
1
1
m2
0
2
2
2
p - m
p - m2

.....

1
2
2
p - m2 - m0

Fig. 18. The iteration of the η′ propagator in full QCD. Only the ﬁrst two diagrams
survive in QQCD.

η’

π

π
(A)

π

π
(B)

Fig. 19. The 1-loop correction to the pion propagator in (A) full QCD (B) QQCD.

ences between χPT and QχPT by considering the behavior of the 2-point
correlation function of the pion.
At 1-loop full QCD has the diagram shown in Fig 19A which is absent in
QQCD. On the other hand, in QQCD, the hairpin term gives a contribution
via the diagram shown in Fig 19B. Such diagrams are neglected in full QCD
as they iterate to produce a massive η ′ . The chiral expansions for Mπ and
fπ in full QCD have been calculated by Gasser and Leutwyler [152],

16
1
2
+ Mπ2 )(2L6 − L4 )
Mπ2 = 2mB 1 + Xπ − Xη8 + 2 (2MK
3
f0

16
+ 2 Mπ2 (2L8 − L5 ) + . . .
f0


16
16
2
+ Mπ2 )L4 + 2 Mπ2 L5 + . . . (16.2)
fπ2 = f0 1 − 4Xπ − 2XK + 2 (2MK
f0
f0


% -------- PDF page 107 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

107

M2

where Li are the O(p4 ) coefficients, Xi = Mi2 log( Λ2 i )/(4πf0 )2 are the chiχSB

ral logs, and fπ = 131 MeV. In QQCD, Sharpe and Bernard and Golterman
[150,151] find that the leading terms are


M2
Mπ2 Q = 2mBQ 1 − δlog 2 π + . . .
ΛχSB


16
fπQ = fQ 1 − 2 Mπ2 L̃5 + . . .
fQ

(16.3)

where δ = M02 /24π 2 fπ2 and L̃i are the quenched O(p4 ) coefficients. The
term proportional to δ is a quenched chiral log and is singular in the limit
mq = 0.
The differences, in general, between quenched and unquenched expressions, as illustrated by the above expressions, are
• All the chiral constants are different in the two theories. For example,
B 6= BQ and f0 6= fQ .
• The normal chiral logs are missing in QQCD.
• The quenched expressions can be singular in the chiral limit due to
the goldstone η ′ , i.e. through terms proportional to δ. These artifacts
become dominant as mq → 0.
The first question raised by the analyses of Sharpe and Bernard and
Golterman is – are the results of quenched χP T , an expansion about mq =
0, meaningful if they are singular in that limit? We do not have a formal
answer to this question. The approach adopted is to do the simulations and
look for such chiral logs by doing fits with and without these terms. The
status of this search has been reviewed in [153,154]. The data, while not
conclusive, does suggest that δ ≈ 0.15, consistent with the value obtained
by using phenomenological values for M0 and fπ .
The second question, assuming that predictions of quenched χP T make
sense, is how does one extract phenomenologically useful results for quantities that require a chiral extrapolation to m? One approach is to fit the
quenched data using the full QCD chiral expansions in a region of quark
masses where the quenched artifacts are small. Current data suggest that
> ms /4. In this case quenching errors are, by definition,
this region is mq ∼
a combination of those due to the absence of quark loops and those due
to fits being made at heavier quark masses. The second possibility is to
fit using the QQCD expression but extrapolate keeping only the terms in

