% SECTION 15: Phase Transitions in the Lattice Theory

% -------- PDF page 93 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

93

15. Phase Transitions in the Lattice Theory
The lattice theory with a finite cut-off µ = π/a can be regarded as an
effective theory. The integration over momenta in the range {π/a, ∞}
renormalizes the couplings and generates additional effective interactions
(see Section 8 and the lectures by M. Lüscher for a detailed discussion of
this approach). Thus, one can regard the lattice theory as a point in an
infinite dimensional space of couplings, and taking the continuum limit as
a flow in this space to the critical point at a = 0 that defines the physical
theory. In this way of thinking about LQCD as a Statistical Mechanics
system one is automatically lead to the questions
– What is the phase diagram in this extended coupling constant space?
– Are there other fixed points, and if so what is the nature of the theory
at those points?
– What are the order parameters that characterize different phases?
The starting point of my discussion of these questions will be the pure
gauge theory. As before, the generalized form of the gauge action is
X X X
i,j
Sg = β
ci,j Re Tr Wµν
(15.1)
i,j

µ,ν

x

i,j
where the sum over i in Wµν
is over all possible Wilson loops and j is over
all representations of the loop. β is the overall coupling and the ci,j give
the relative strengths of the different loops.
The three simplest gauge invariant probes of the phase diagram are
(gauge non-invariant quantities have zero expectation values as shown by
Elitzur [37])
– Wilson loops: These, as discussed in Section 14.2.1, contain information
on the potential between static quarks.
– Wilson/Polyakov lines. These measure the free energy of an isolated
quark.
– The chiral condensate ψψ . This provides information on vacuum alignment under spontaneous chiral symmetry breaking.
LQCD, in the limit g → ∞, can be analyzed using strong coupling expansions as discussed in Section 14.2.2. Using these it was shown that, in
the limit g → ∞, the expectation value for Wilson loops has an area law
for all gauge groups (U(1) and SU(N)). Since electrodynamics (U(1)) does
not confine, this region of coupling space cannot correspond to the physical theory. In other words, there should exist a phase transition separating
the strong coupling and weak coupling phases of non-confining theories like
U(1). This has been established for U(1), both analytically [130] and by


% -------- PDF page 94 --------
Rajan Gupta

94

Monte Carlo simulations [131]. For a theory like QCD, with both confinement and asymptotic freedom, we need to know if the two regions of
parameter space are analytically connected. Analytical methods like strong
and weak coupling expansions can be used provided the range of validity of
the expansions gives a sufficiently large overlap, otherwise non-perturbative
methods are necessary.
To address these questions for SU(3) I show, in Fig. 14, the behavior of
square loops, {Re Tr W i×i }, as a function of the coupling β for the simplest
action – Wilson’s plaquette action. Also shown for comparison are the
strong coupling expansion to O(β 5 ) [133], the weak coupling expansion to
O(g 4 ) [134] and its tadpole improved (TIPT) version. These numerical
data show that there is a smooth though sharp transition between the
weak coupling and strong coupling phases, i.e. no phase transitions. The
< β ∼ 6, with the larger loops
crossover takes place in the window 5 ∼
becoming perturbative at slightly higher β. Both strong coupling and weak
coupling expansions fail in this region (for TIPT this is evident only for
large loops), so numerical methods are essential. Such an analysis was the
basis of the pioneering work of Creutz, and Creutz, Jacobs, and Rebbi [132],
who showed that the string tension changes from its strong to weak coupling
behavior without a phase transition. Their calculations yielded the first
clue that it may be possible to get continuum physics with O(20%) errors
> 6.0.
from simulations at β ∼
The TIPT result shown in Fig. 14 is obtained as follows. The mean-field
improved Wilson loop expectation value is defined to be
W i×i

=

f i×i u4i
W
0 ,

(15.2)

where for u0 I use the non-perturbative value obtained from the plaquette
f i×i , after
as it is more readily available. The improved expansion for W
absorbing the tadpoles using the plaquette, is given by
f i×i =
W

W i×i
W 1×1

i ,

(15.3)

where both terms on the right are first expanded in terms of g̃ 2 =
g 2 /u40 (pert) = g 2 / W 1×1 pert to order g̃ 4 , and then the ratio is truncated
at order g̃ 4 . It is obvious that using u0 from the plaquette guarantees a
perfect fit for W 1×1 , however the improvement in even the W 4×4 , is
remarkable.
The first study of the phase diagram in the generalized coupling constant
space was done using an action constructed from the plaquette in both the


% -------- PDF page 95 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

95

Fig. 14. The behavior of the expectation value of square Wilson loops as a function
< β < 6.0. Result of the
of coupling β. The data, show a sharp crossover between 5 ∼
∼
strong coupling expansion to O(β 5 ) and weak coupling expansion to O(g 4 ) are shown
by the dashed line. Results of tadpole improved weak coupling expansion (TIPT) are
shown by the solid lines. Since the improved coupling is deﬁned in terms of the 1 × 1
loop, gI2 = g 2 / < W 1×1 >, the agreement between the data and TIPT is a trivial result
of the construction as explained in the text. The improvement in larger loops, however,
demonstrates the eﬃcacy of TIPT.

fundamental and adjoint representations of the SU(N) gauge theory [135]

S = βF

X 1

N

Re TrW1×1 + βA

X 1
|TrW1×1 |2 .
N2

(15.4)


% -------- PDF page 96 --------
Rajan Gupta

96

For this action, the effective bare coupling, obtained using a Taylor expansion, is
βef f ≡

2N
= βF + 2βA .
2
gef
f

(15.5)

Thus simulations can be done in the negative βA region as long as
βF > 2|βA |. This is a classical condition that avoids the weak coupling
singularity.
The resulting lines of first order bulk transitions, along with the location
of the end point for three gauge groups, are show in Fig. 15. The point
at βA = ∞ is the first order transition in the Z(N ) gauge theory, while
that at βF = 0 corresponds to that in the SO(N ) theory. The location of
the third end-point with respect to the βF axis depends on N . Current
estimates of the location are [136–138]
βF = 1.22

βA = 1.25

SU(2)

βF = 4.00(7)

βA = 2.06(8)

SU(3)

βF ∼ 12 − 15

βA = (−1) − (−5)

SU(4)

(15.6)

The fact that for N ≤ 3 this point lies above the βF axis is consistent with
the observation that there is no discontinuity in the behavior of Wilson
loop data as show in Fig. 14. If one were to take the continuum limit along
a line crossing the transition line above this point, for example along the
dotted line A in Fig. 15, then there would be discontinuities in Wilson loops
(and consequently in the string tension), specific heat, and glueball masses
at the point of intersection with the transition line. At the end-point X
the specific heat diverges and consequently the 0++ glueball mass goes to
zero. (Note that the specific heat is the volume integral of the 0++ glueball
correlation function with the plaquette as the interpolating operator. Thus
the divergence in the specific heat implies a zero in the 0++ glueball mass.)
The string tension and masses of glueball states with other spin-parity
quantum numbers are non-zero and continuous at this point. Such phase
transitions are lattice artifacts. For example, taking the continuum limit
at X, i.e. setting a = 0, would give a free theory as all states other than
the 0++ glueball become infinitely heavy.
One can take the continuum limit for the SU (3) gauge theory along any
trajectory like A or W or B. In case A it is necessary to keep βF > βF∗ to
avoid the lattice artifacts. Along W , while there are no singularities, the
artifact X could, around βF = 5.7, cause significant deviations from the
physics of the relevant fixed point at g = 0. Lattice data verify this scenario
– the non-perturbative β-function measured from observables other than


% -------- PDF page 97 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

97

Z(N)

βA
SO(N)

A

SU(2)
X

SU(3)
W
SU(4)
B

βF

Fig. 15. The phase diagram of SU(N) gauge theories in the fundamental-adjoint coupling
constant space.

M0++ shows a large dip around βF = 5.7 [89]. Thus, to avoid these artifacts
> 6.0. On a trajectory like B the influence of
requires simulations for βF ∼
X is expected to be less than along W , and it is possible that contact
with continuum physics can be made on coarser lattices. If so then the
trajectory B corresponds to an “improved action” in accordance with the
third criteria enumerated in Section 8.
This qualitative argument for taking the continuum limit along a trajectory like B is supported by Monte Carlo renormalization group (MCRG)
estimates of the renormalized trajectory [87]. Such calculations of the RT
yield a negative value for βA . As explained above, the most sensitive probe
of the expected improvement on including a βA term in the action, is the
behavior of M0++ . Until recently tests of this conjecture were limited by
statistical accuracy [166]. The recent calculations on anisotropic lattices of
glueball spectra by Morningstar and Peardon [139] validate this scenario.
I shall discuss their results in Section 18.3.
It is clear that there are additional phase transitions in the generalized
lattice theory. For example one would get a similar diagram to that in
Fig. 15 if the action was defined in terms of the 1 × 2 loop in the funda-

