% SECTION 13: O(a) improvement in the Dirac Action

% -------- PDF page 74 --------
Rajan Gupta

74

irrelevant operators. Since each loop contributes to operators of all dimensions it is not clear how to parameterize the residual error (O(a2 ) + O(a4 ),
or O(a4 ), or higher). Also, implementing the equations of motions (removing the freedom associated with redundant directions) has not been easy.
So there is not yet a consensus on the obvious minimal set of operators that
should be kept. Different operators have been added based on (i) their importance in perturbative expansions, (ii) size of the coefficients in blocked
actions (keep in mind that the freedom of the choice of the blocking transformation and consequently the associated RT effects these coefficients),
and (iii) specific incorporation of non-perturbative effects; for example the
inclusion of a negative adjoint coupling helps avoid the phase structure in
the fundamental-adjoint plane (see Section 15), and adding loops mimicking the F µν F̃µν operator help give scale invariant instantons [100,101]. One
hopes that a more precise method for tuning the gauge action will emerge
in the future. Fortunately, in spite of this ambiguity, the situation is very
encouraging. The improvement seen in the restoration of rotational invariance (measured using qq potential as shown in Fig. 8), glueball spectrum,
and finite temperature studies is remarkable. To a good approximation,
most of these actions are very well represented by adding just the W (1×2)
term with a coefficient larger than the value suggested by tadpole improvement, and keeping a few higher representations of the plaquette. Such a
truncated space keeps the computational problem tractable.
The bottom line is that even though there is not a commonly accepted
improved gauge action, the improvements seen with any of the above actions are significant. At present the more pressing challenge, in terms of
the size of the errors and the computational cost, is improving the Dirac
discretization. This is discussed next.

13. O(a) improvement in the Dirac Action
The first attempt to improve the Wilson fermion action by removing the
O(a) corrections was by Hamber and Wu [102]. They added a two link
term to the Wilson action
SHW = AW


rκ X L
ψ (x) Uµ (x)Uµ (x + µ̂)ψ L (x + 2µ̂) +
+
4a x,µ


Uµ† (x − µ̂)Uµ† (x − 2µ̂)ψ L (x − 2µ̂)


% -------- PDF page 75 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

≡

X

HW
ψ L (x)Mxy
ψL (y).

75

(13.1)

x,y

It is easy to check by Taylor expansion that, at the classical level, the O(a)
artifact in SW is cancelled by the HW term. One can include quantum
corrections by calculating the relative coefficient in perturbation theory.
It turns out that this action has not been pursued – in the 1980’s due to
the lack of computer power, and in the 1990’s due to the merits of the
Sheikholeslami-Wohlert (called SW or the clover) action [20].
13.1. The Sheikholeslami-Wohlert (clover) Action
SW proposed adding a second dimension five operator to SW , the magnetic
moment term, to remove the O(a) artifacts without spoiling Wilson’s fix
for doublers. The resulting SW action is
SSW = SW −

iaCSW κr
ψ(x)σµν Fµν ψ(x) .
4

(13.2)

The fact that this action is O(a) improved for on-shell quantities cannot
be deduced from a Taylor expansion. To show improvement requires an
enumeration of all dimension 5 operators, the use of equations of motion
to remove some of them, and incorporating the remaining two (m2 ψψ and
mF µν Fµν ) by renormalizing g 2 → g 2 (1 + bg ma) and m → m(1 + bm ma).
The construction of the SW action has been explained in detail by Prof.
Lüscher at this school, so instead of repeating it, I direct you to his lectures.
I will simply summarize results of tuning CSW using both perturbative and
non-perturbative methods. A list of perturbatively improved values of CSW
that have been used in simulations is as follows.
CSW = 1
CSW = 1 + 0.2659(1)g02
CSW = 1/u30
CSW = 1/u30 (1 + 0.0159gI2)

tree-level improvement
1-loop improved [103]
tadpole improved
1-loop tadpole improved

In the 1-loop TI result u0 was chosen to be the fourth root of the plaquette. As an exercise convince yourself that using the expectation value of the
link in Landau gauge gives a value closer (1.6) to the non-perturbatively
improved result (1.77 at g = 1) given below. For each of the above values of
CSW , the errors are reduced from O(a) (Wilson action) to at least O(αs a).
The recent exciting development, also reviewed by Lüscher, is that the
axial Ward identity CSW can be used to non-perturbatively tune CSW
and remove all O(a) artifacts provided one simultaneously improves the
coupling g 2 , the quark mass mq , and the currents [104]. Estimates of


% -------- PDF page 76 --------
Rajan Gupta

76

CSW have been made at a number of values of g for the quenched theory
with Wilson’s gauge action [104,105]. These data can be fit by [105]
CSW =

1 − 0.6084g 2 − 0.2015g 4 + 0.03075g 6
.
1 − 0.8743g 2

(13.3)

for 6/g 2 > 5.7.
The advantages of the SW action is that it is local and leaves perturbation theory tractable [106]. Adding the clover term is only a ∼ 15% overhead on Wilson fermion simulations. An example of improvement obtained
using the SW versus Wilson action for fixed quark mass
√
√ (Mπ /Mρ = 0.7)
is that the deviations from the a = 0 values in MN / σ and Mvector / σ
at a = 0.17 fermi are reduced from 30 − 40% →∼ 3 − 5% [105]. Further
tests and evaluation of the improvement are being done by a number of collaborations. I expect a number of quenched results to be reported at the
LATTICE 98 conference, and these should appear on the e-print archive
by late 1998.
13.2. D234c action
As mentioned before, there are two sources of discretization errors: (i)
approximating derivatives by finite differences, and (ii) quantum corrections, for example those due to modes with momentum > π/a that are
absent from the lattice theory. Alford, Klassen, and Lepage have proposed
improved gauge and Dirac actions that reduce (i) by classical improvement and (ii) by tadpole improvement [107,79]. Their current proposal for
isotropic lattices, called the D234c action as it involves second, third, and
fourth order derivatives, is

X
C3 2
(3)
MD234c = m(1 + 0.5ram) +
γµ ∆(1)
−
a
γ
∆
µ µ
µ
6
µ

X 1
CF X
C4 2 (4)
(2)
− a∆µ −
.
(13.4)
+r
a
a ∆µ
σµν Fµν +
2
4
24
µ
ν
(n)

Here ∆µ is the nth order lattice covariant derivative (symmetric and of
shortest extent). The term proportional to C3 is precisely what is needed
(1)
to kill the leading discretization error in ∆µ as shown in Eq. 7.6. The
terms proportional to r are generated by a field redefinition and thus represent a redundant operator. They, therefore leave unalterated the O(a)
improvement of the naive action for on-shell quantities. The three terms
in it are respectively the Wilson term, that is again used to remove the


% -------- PDF page 77 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

77

doublers, clover term (for Fµν they use an O(a2 ) improved version) as in
the SW action needed to remove the O(a) error introduced by the Wilson
fix, and an a3 correction. To include quantum corrections to the classical
values C3 = CF = C4 = 1 they resort to tadpole improvement, i.e., they
divide all links appearing in MD234c by u0 , which is taken to be the mean
link in Landau gauge.
Quantum corrections generally also induce additional operators, however, in perturbation theory these start at O(αs ). After tadpole improvement the coefficients of αs for such operators are all expected to be small,
so one hopes that their contributions can be neglected. The philoso(6)
phy/motivation is analogous to dropping the small L2 term in the tadpole
improved Luscher-Weisz pure gauge action given in Eq. 12.14.
For two of the coefficients, CF and C3 , the authors have carried out
non-perturbative tests of the accuracy of tadpole improvement [79]. Since
(3)
only the operator ∆µ breaks rotational symmetry at O(a2 ), therefore C3
can be tuned non-perturbatively by studying rotational invariance of dispersion relations. Similary, the clover term and the Wilson term break
chiral symmetry at O(a), thus their relative coefficient CF can be tuned by
studying the axial Ward identity. Results of their tests show that errors in
the spectrum and dispersion relations for momenta as high as p = 1.5/a
are ≈ 10% even at a = 0.4 fermi! The authors are extending their analyses of the D234 action to anisotropic lattices which, as will be discussed
in Section 18.4, have already yielded rich dividends in the calculation of
glueball masses.
13.3. NRQCD action
In the simulation of heavy quarks one has to worry about O(mH a) errors
in addition to O(pa) and O(ΛQCD a). For charm and bottom quarks these
errors are O(1) in the range of lattice spacings one can reasonably simulate.
Lepage and collaborators, recognizing that the heavy quark in heavy-heavy
or heavy-light systems is, to a good approximation, non-relativistic, developed a non-relativistic formulation (NRQCD) valid for mH a > 1 [108]. In
this approach, the action for the two-component Pauli spinors is obtained
by a Foldy-Wouthuysen transformation, and relativistic and discretization
corrections are added as a systematic expansion in 1/M and p/M . One
version of the NRQCD action is [109]
(13.5)
L = ψ t ψt
 
n
n 



aH0
aH0
aδH
aδH
1−
1−
ψt−1 ,
U4† 1−
− ψ t 1−
2
2n
2n
2
t
t−1
t
t−1


% -------- PDF page 78 --------
Rajan Gupta

78

where ψ is the two-component Pauli spinor and H0 is the nonrelativistic
kinetic energy operator,
∆(2)
.
(13.6)
2M0
δH includes relativistic and finite-lattice-spacing corrections,
gc1
δH = −
σ·B
2M0
gc3
igc2
(∆ · E − E · ∆) −
σ · (∆ × E − E × ∆)
+
2
8(M0 )
8(M0 )2
H0 = −

−

c5 a2 ∆(4)
c6 a(∆(2) )2
c4 (∆(2) )2
+
−
.
8(M0 )3
24M0
16n(M0 )2

(13.7)

Here E and B are the electric and magnetic fields, ∆ and ∆(2) are the
(4)
spatial gauge-covariant lattice derivative
P 4and laplacian, and ∆ is a lattice
version of the continuum operator
Di . The parameter n is introduced
to remove instabilities in the heavy quark propagator due to the highest
momentum modes [108]. Again, the tree-level coefficients ci = 1 can be
tadpole-improved by rescaling all the link matrices by u0 .
This formulation has been used very successfully to calculate αs from
the upsilon spectrum [110] as discussed in Section 19, the heavy-heavy and
heavy-light spectrum [111], and the heavy-light decay constants fB and
fBs [109]. The drawback of NRQCD is that it is an effective theory and
one cannot take a → 0. In fact, to simulate charm and bottom quarks, one
< 1/a ∼
< 2.5 GeV to keep mH a > 1. The
has to work in a narrow window 1 ∼
good news is that current data [110,111,109] show that the discretization
and relativistic corrections are small and under control with the terms
included in Eq. 13.7.
13.4. Perfect action
The development of a perfect Dirac action is not complete. The method is
same as used for the gauge action and discussed in [90]. The bottleneck
is that the saddle point integration gives an action that even in the free
field limit involves a number of sites, and the gauge connections between
any pair of sites is the average of a large number of paths [112]. First tests
of such an action truncated to a 34 hypercube have been carried out by
Degrand and collaborators [100]. From these it is not clear whether the
improvement, compared to other discretization schemes, justifies the extra
cost of simulating such an action. Hopefully better ways to tune and test
such actions will be formulated soon.


% -------- PDF page 79 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

79

13.5. Fermilab action
The Fermilab group has proposed a “Heavy Wilson” fermion action [113].
This action is meant to interpolate between the light O(a) improved SWclover action and the NRQCD action for heavy quarks. The goal is to
remove not only O(a) discretization corrections but also take into account
all powers of ma errors so that charmonium and bottomonium systems can
be simulated with the same reliability as light-light physics. This improvement is especially targeted towards improving heavy-light matrix elements.
So far no tests have been reported with the proposed action, therefore I
will not reproduce the action here but refer interested readers to [113] for
details.

13.6. Summary
In analogy to discussions of improved gauge actions, having seen tangible evidence for improvement in quenched lattice data with each of the
above formulations, the question is, which action is the most efficient for a
comprehensive study? The deciding factor, in my opinion, will be dynamical simulations since the prefactor and the scaling exponent (L∼10 ) makes
the cost of update of background configurations prohibitive without improvement on today’s computers. Dynamical simulations using improved
actions have just begun, so it will be a few years before enough data can
be generated to determine the advantages and disadvantages of different
approaches.
Finally, I should mention a recent novel approach −− domain wall
fermions −− for improving the chiral properties of Wilson fermions [114].
In this approach the system (domain) is 5-dimensional and the fermions live
on 4-dimensional surfaces that make up the opposite boundaries (walls).
The 4-dimensional gauge fields on the two walls are identical, whereas the
fermion zero-modes have opposite chirality. The overlap between these
modes is exponentially suppressed by the separation in the fifth dimension. Consequently, the chiral symmetry breaking contributions are also
supressed, and results with good chiral properties for vector like theories
like QCD can be obtained by adding the contribution from the two domain
walls. First simulations of weak matrix elements show results with good
chiral properties and in general look extremely promising [115]. Since I do
not do justice to this exciting approach in these lectures, interested readers
should consult [115] and references therein.

