% SECTION 20: Quark Masses

% -------- PDF page 136 --------
136

Rajan Gupta

20. Quark Masses
Quarks are not asymptotic states of nature, so their masses cannot be
measured in experiments. They are generally defined in some perturbative
scheme like M S and at some scale µ. Their values remain amongst the
least well known of the Standard Model parameters. In this section I will
discuss their extraction from lattice data.
The extraction of the up, down, and strange quark masses from the
hadron spectrum is done by inverting Eqs. 18.3 once the coefficients Aπ
etc. are determined from fits to the lattice data. As I have mentioned
before, current lattice simulations neglect iso-spin breaking effects, so we
can only determine m = (mu + md )/2 and ms . I will discuss these first and
then briefly mention the extraction of the heavy quark masses mc and mb .
In the quenched approximation, the most straightforward way to estimate m is to extrapolate Mπ2 /X 2 to the physical value. Here X is a
dimensionful quantity like fπ or Mρ or MN or M∆ that does not depend
on ms , and de facto sets the lattice scale 1/a. Of the above quantities,
using Mρ is the most controversial as it decays via strong interactions and
has a large width, 170 MeV. On the other hand the lattice data for Mρ is
most readily available and has good signal. Also, in the quenched approximation the ρ does not decay. Using Mρ to set a in QQCD versus some
other quantity can therefore give an overall scale uncertainty. The spread
in 1/a extracted from different quantities is found to be ≈ 10%, and this
uncertainty, inherent to the quenched approximation, will be treated as an
overall systematic error. Similarly, one can set ms by extrapolating the
ratio Ms /X, where Ms is any state that depends on ms like MK , or MK ∗ ,
or Mφ or any of the baryons containing a strange quark. The world data
show that different choices of Ms give rise to a ≈ 20% spread in ms . It is
2
important to note that if one assumes the relation MPS
= BPS mq (which
LQCD has not validated as true for the whole range [m, ms ]), and uses MK
to fix ms , then the ratio ms /m has to be 25.9 if m is set using Mπ2 .
In the full theory X depends on ms , and similarly Ms depends on m,
through sea quark effects. Thus, m, a, and ms have to be fixed by solving
the coupled set of equations.
Simulations of the hadron spectrum have been done by a number of collaborations around the world, and there exists a large amount of data for
the masses of hadrons as a function of the quark masses and lattice spacing.
(Almost all lattice collaborations, for example the APE, Columbia University, CP-PACS, Fermilab, GF11, HEMCGC, JLQCD, Los Alamos, SCRI,
staggered, UKQCD, and the Wuppertal University collaborations, have
contributed to these calculations [183].) In early analyses the estimates of


% -------- PDF page 137 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

137

quark masses varied by almost a factor of two between different formulations of fermions, and the pattern of the discretization and quenching errors
was not obvious from the work of any one collaboration. Clarification of
this issue has been obtained by putting together all the world data for
Wilson, clover, and staggered fermions [183,184]. The final picture for m,
based on the most recent, high statistics, and large lattices data is shown
in Fig. 34 for the three fermion formulations. This figure shows clearly
that the factor of ∼ 2 difference at 1/a ∼ 2 GeV shrinks to ∼ 15% after
extrapolation to a = 0, i.e. most of the difference can be explained as due
to discretization errors.
The behavior of ms versus a is very similar. A summary of the quenched
results in MeV at scale µ = 2 GeV, based on an analysis of the 1997 world
data [185], is

m(Mπ )
ms (MK )
ms (Mφ )

Wilson
4.1(1)
107(2)
139(11)

TI Clover
3.8(1)
99(3)
117(8)

Staggered
3.5(1)
91(2)
109(5) .

These estimates were obtained using the following Ansatz̈e.
– Chiral fits were made keeping only the lowest order terms shown in
Eqs. 18.3.
– Mπ2 /Mρ is used to fix m.
2
– Results for ms are given for two choices, MK
/Mρ and Mφ /Mρ . (Using
MK ∗ /Mρ gives values almost identical to those with Mφ /Mρ . This implies
that for the choice ms (Mφ ) one could equivalently have set the scale using
MK ∗ instead of Mρ .)
– Since linear chiral fits have been used, ms (MK ) ≡ 25.9m.
– The matching factor, Zm , between lattice and M S schemes is the tadpole
improved 1-loop result.
– The extrapolation to a = 0 is done using the lowest order discretization
error, i.e. O(a) and O(αs a) for Wilson and clover, and a quadratic in a2
for staggered.
The final difference in estimates between Wilson, tadpole improved
clover (TI Clover), and staggered results is ≈ 15% as shown in Fig. 34.
This could be due to the neglected higher order discretization errors and/or
due to the difference between non-perturbative and 1-loop estimates of Z’s.
Similarly, the ≈ 20% variation in ms with the state used to extract it, MK
versus Mφ (or equivalently MK ∗ ) could be due to the quenched approximation or partly an artifact of keeping only the lowest order discretization
correction in the extrapolations. To disentangle these discretization and


% -------- PDF page 138 --------
Rajan Gupta

138

Fig. 34. The behavior of mu + md as a function of the lattice spacing a for three
discretization schemes – Wilson, clover, and staggered. Linear extrapolations to a = 0
are shown for Wilson and clover formulations, while for staggered both O(a2 ) and O(a4 )
terms are incorporated in the ﬁt. The theoretically expected form for discretization
errors in the clover formulation is O(αs a). The extrapolated value using this form is
shown by the symbol burst.

quenching errors requires precise unquenched data with roughly physical
values for light quarks.
For best estimates of quenched results I average the data and use the
spread as the error. To these, I add a second systematic error of 10% due to
the uncertainty in the determination of the scale 1/a, which partly reflects
the uncertainty due to the quenched approximation. The results, in the
M S scheme and evaluated at 2 GeV, are [185]
m = 3.8(4)(4) MeV


% -------- PDF page 139 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

ms = 110(20)(11) MeV .

139

(20.1)

20.1. Light Quark Masses from Ward Identities
A second method for extracting quark masses is based on axial and vector
current Ward identities
ZA ∂µ Aµ = (m1 + m2 )R ZP P ,
ZV ∂µ Vµ = (m1 − m2 )R ZS S ,

(20.2)

where 1, 2 are the flavor indices and P and S are the lattice pseudoscalar
and scalar densities. From these one can construct ratios of 2-point correlation functions
ZP
P(τ ) P(0)
∂µ Aµ (τ ) P = (m1 + m2 )R
ZA
ZS
∂µ Vµ (τ ) S(0) = (m1 − m2 )R
S(τ ) S(0) ,
(20.3)
ZV
which give the renormalized quark masses once the various renormalization
constants Zi are known. Since the Ward identities are operator identities,
Eq. 20.3 holds for all τ except at very short times where there is influence
of contact terms. Thus it is not necessary for the signal to persist to
asymptotic τ as needed in spectroscopy method to isolate the lowest state.
The two estimates of quark masses, from spectroscopy and from the
Ward identities, should agree in the continuum limit. A comparison of the
two data sets for the Wilson action and using 1-loop perturbative Z’s is
shown in Fig. 35. The two estimates are significantly different at finite a,
however, a linear extrapolation works for both sets of data, and the extrapolated values are in surprisingly good agreement. One could therefore
attribute the differences at finite a to discretization errors.
The recent non-perturbative calculations of the Z’s [186] challenge this
nice picture. Fig. 35 also shows the same data analyzed using these nonperturbative Z’s. At fixed a the non-perturbative Z’s increase both the
hadron spectroscopy and WI results to roughly the same value. This suggests that most of the difference is due to the O(α2s ) corrections to the 1loop Z’s and not due to the O(a) discretization errors as mentioned before.
However, the non-perturbative calculation of Z’s themselves have O(a) errors that have not been resolved in the results of [186]. As a result we do
not have a clear separation between the effects of the O(a) discretization
errors and the O(α2s ) errors in these Z’s.
The bottom line is that, even though we have not resolved the two
kinds of errors, and while both the value at fixed a and the slope in a


% -------- PDF page 140 --------
140

Rajan Gupta

Fig. 35. The behavior of m = (mu + md )/2 as a function of the lattice spacing a for Wilson fermions. Data from the hadron spectroscopy and Ward Identity method are shown
for two ways of estimating the renormalization constants, i.e. one loop perturbative and
non-perturbative.

increases significantly on changing from 1-loop to non-perturbative Z’s,
the extrapolated value is roughly unchanged.
To conclude, I believe that we have finally obtained values for light quark
masses with reliable estimates of statistical and all systematic errors other
than quenching. Calculations are already underway to significantly increase
the number of data points with nf = 2 and 4 flavors of dynamical quarks to
reduce the quenching uncertainty. Also, new ways to calculate the renormalization constants non-perturbatively are being developed. Therefore, I
expect that in the next few years there will be a significant increase in the
precision of both QQCD and full QCD estimates of light quark masses.


% -------- PDF page 141 --------
INTRODUCTION TO LATTICE QCD

141

20.2. Schrodinger Functional Approach
In the above discussion the term non-perturbative Z’s referred to only the
lattice scheme. In the required matching constants one still has to use perturbative expressions for the renormalization constants in the continuum
scheme and make a good estimate of the matching point. The ALPHA
Collaboration has proposed a method for removing this last vestige of dependence on perturbation theory [187]. The details of their method have
been discussed by Prof. Lüscher at this school, so I will just summarize
the key points.
(i) Calculate the quark mass using the axial WI method at some infrared
lattice scale. At the same time calculate ZP and ZA non-perturbatively
in the Schrödinger functional scheme.
(ii) Evolve this lattice result to some very high scale using the step scaling
function calculated non-perturbatively.
(iii) At this high scale, where αs is small, define the renormalization group
independent mass
m
b = lim mR 2β0 g 2
a→0

−γ0 /2β0

(20.4)

This m
b is scheme independent, thus subsequent conversion to a running
mass in some scheme and at some desired scale can be done in the continuum using the most accurate versions (4-loop) of the scale evolution
equations [188].
To reiterate, the advantage of this method is that the lattice calculations directly predict the scale and scheme invariant quantity m.
b The
calculations by the ALPHA Collaboration are still in progress and at this
time estimates for m
b have not been released. It will be interesting to see
how they compare with conventional hadron spectroscopy or WI methods
discussed above. My prejudice is that they will be very similar.
20.3. Role of quark masses in CP violation
A very opportune application of the precise determination of the light quark
masses is in the Standard Model prediction of direct CP violation in kaon
decays characterized by the ratio ǫ′ /ǫ (see lectures by Prof. Buras and

