                                       CONFINEMENT       OF QUABKS

D„,(x) is given by a weighted average over all pos-
sible classical quark paths and all possible classi-
cal values of the gauge field. The currents J„c,x}
and J, (0) are thought of as producing a quark pair
at the origin which later annihilate at the point x:
One has to sum over all paths joining the points
0 and x for each of the pair of quarks.
  An example of paths for the quark and antiquark
are shown in Fig. 3. The vacuum can also emit
and absorb quark pairs; this leads to further
closed loops as illustrated in Fig. 4. All possible        I IG. 4. Example of current loop {as in Fig. 3) with   an
loops must be summed over too. It is also pos-           extra vacuum loop.
sible to have independent loops for the points 0
and x (Fig. 5), but this possibility will not be im-
                                                         a more difficult question to answer and will not
portant here.
   The weight associated with a given quark path         be discussed in this paper.
                                                            Note that x must be large: If x is small there
or set of paths includes a factor of exp[ig)A„(x)
xds" J, where A„(x) is the gauge field. Here             is little likelihood of finding a large size loop.
   ..  ds" is a line integral or a sum over line inte-   This may seem a bit peculiar: One expects quarks
                                                         to appear in the final state of e -e annihilation
grals for each of the quark-antiquark loops, in-
                                                         only at large virtual-photon momentum q if they
cluding the loop joining the points 0 and x. The
constant g is the coupling constant of the gauge         appear at all, and large q means small x, not
                                                         large x. The answer to this paradox has two
theory. There are further weight factors inde-
pendent of A. Finally, independently of the quark
                                                         parts. First, the important paths in the Feynman
                                                         path integral bear no detailed relation to possible
paths there is another weight factor, namely, the
                                                         physical final states (the paths are paths of bare
exponential of the free action for the gauge field.
The combined weight factor is then averaged over
                                                         particles, not physical particles). Secondly,
all quark paths and all gauge fields A„(x) to give       large x does not necessarily mean small q. In
the current-current propagator.
                                                         fact the study of whether well-separated quark-
                                                         antiquark paths exist for large )( is really a. search
   In order that quarks exist as separate final-state
                                                         for a quark-antiquark threshold in e -e annihila-
particles it must be possible to have quark-anti-
                                                         tion, which would contribute a term -exp(2mivx )
quark loops with well-separated quark and anti-
                                                         to the current-current propagator for large x,
quark lines, at least when x and 0 are far apart.
                                                         where m is the quark mass. (Here —means up to
This is illustrated in Fig. 6(a). If the quark and
                                                         a. power of x'. ) Such a term corresponds in mo-
antiquark paths are unlikely to separate beyond a
                                                         mentum space to the singularity at the threshold
fixed size, say 10 "cm [see Fig. 6(b)], then
                                                         q' = (2m)'.
clearly no detector will see a. quark or antiquark
                                                           Suppose the gauge-field averaging is performed
in isolation.
   It is assumed in this discussion that vacuum
                                                         before the quark-paths averaging. Then one deter-
                                                         mine the average over all gauge fields of the
loops are not important. If vacuum loops are im-
                                                         weight factor exp[ifgA„(y)ds" ] weighted further
portant enough then space will be filled with a
                                                         with the exponential. of the free gauge-field action.
high density of vacuum-produced      quark-antiquark
pairs. In particular, there will be many quark-          For an Abelian gauge theory this average can be
antiquark pairs inside a detector of macroscopic         computed explicitly: It is
size. The question then is whether there can be
an excess of quarks over antiquarks, or vice
versa, in a region of macroscopic size. This is

                  X




                                                           FIG. 5. Example of separate quark loops for the points
  FIG. 3. An example of quark {q) and antiquark   {q)    0 and x. {Integration over the gauge field produces gauge
paths connecting the points 0 and x.                     propagators which connect these loops. )
